
--- PAGE 683 ---
662
SECTION 23  Endocrinology
as adult body odor, pubic and axillary hair, and facial skin 
oiliness and acne. In boys it is also important to note whether 
the testes are enlarged more than 2.5 cm in length (4 mL 
volume), which implies gonadarche. If the testes are not enlarged 
but virilization is progressing, the source of the androgens may 
be the adrenal glands or exogenous sources.
Laboratory evaluation includes determination of adrenal 
androgen and sex steroid levels (testosterone, estradiol, DHEAS 
[dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate]) and baseline gonadotropin 
concentrations. The inherent nature of gonadotropin secretion is 
characterized by low secretory rates throughout childhood and 
pulsatile secretion in adolescents and adults. If baseline gonado-
tropin values are elevated into the normal pubertal range, central 
precocious puberty is likely. If baseline gonadotropins are low, 
however, no immediate conclusion may be drawn as to GnRH-
dependent versus GnRH-independent precocious puberty. This 
distinction often requires the assessment of gonadotropin 
responsiveness to GnRH stimulation. A prepubertal GnRH 
response is FSH predominant, whereas a pubertal response is 
more LH predominant. Thyroid hormone determination also 
is useful because severe primary hypothyroidism can cause 
incomplete precocious puberty. If there is a suggestion of a 
CNS anomaly or a tumor (CNS, hepatic, adrenal, ovarian, or 
testicular), MRI of the brain and pituitary with and without 
contrast is indicated. MRI of the is recommended in patients 
with the diagnosis of central precocious puberty; however, the 
yield is generally low in girls over age 6. Boys as well as young 
girls have a higher risk of CNS lesions as a cause of precocious 
puberty.
Treatment
Long-acting, superactive analogs of GnRH (leuprolide depot, 
histrelin depot) are the treatment of choice for central precocious 
puberty. They suppress gonadotropin secretion by downregu-
lating GnRH receptors in the pituitary gonadotropes (Table 
174.5), causing gonadal secretion to revert to the prepubertal 
state. Boys with GnRH-independent premature Leydig cell and 
occur. Adrenal carcinomas usually secrete adrenal androgens, 
such as DHEA; adrenal adenomas may virilize a child as a 
result of the production of androgen or may feminize a child 
as a result of the production of estrogen.
Boys may have precocious gonadarche on the basis of a rare 
entity called familial male-limited precocious puberty. This 
condition, with germ cell maturation caused by an X-limited 
dominant defect, produces constitutive activation of the LH 
receptor that leads to continuous production and secretion 
of testosterone without requiring LH or human chorionic 
gonadotropin (hCG).
hCG-secreting tumors stimulate LH receptors and increase 
testosterone secretion. These tumors may be found in various 
places, including the pineal gland (dysgerminomas) or the liver 
(hepatoblastoma).
Germinomas are noncalcifying hypothalamic or pineal 
tumors that frequently produce hCG, which may cause sexual 
precocity in prepubertal boys (hCG cross reacts with the LH 
receptor because of the similarity of structure between LH 
and hCG). Optic or hypothalamic gliomas (with or without 
neurofibromatosis), astrocytomas, and ependymomas may cause 
precocious puberty by disrupting the negative restraint of the 
areas of the CNS that normally inhibit pubertal development 
throughout childhood. These tumors may require radiotherapy, 
which contributes to a significant risk for hypopituitarism.
Ovarian cysts may occur once or may be recurrent. High 
serum estrogen values may mimic ovarian tumors. Congenital 
adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is a cause of virilization in girls 
(see Chapter 177).
Evaluation of Sexual Precocity
The first step in evaluating sexual precocity is to determine 
which characteristics of normal puberty are apparent (see 
Chapter 67) and whether estrogen effects, androgen effects, or 
both are present (see Table 174.4). In girls the estrogen effect 
manifests as breast development, uterine increase, and, eventu-
ally, menarche. Both boys and girls manifest the androgen effect 
TABLE 174.5  Pharmacological Therapy of Sexual Precocity
DISORDER
TREATMENT
ACTION AND RATIONALE
GnRH-dependent true or central 
precocious puberty
GnRH agonists
Desensitization of gonadotropes; blocks action of 
endogenous GnRH
GnRH-independent incomplete sexual 
precocity
Girls
Autonomous ovarian cysts
Medroxyprogesterone acetate
Inhibition of ovarian steroidogenesis; regression of cyst 
(inhibition of FSH release)
McCune-Albright syndrome
Medroxyprogesterone acetate*
Inhibition of ovarian steroidogenesis; regression of cyst 
(inhibition of FSH release)
Boys
Testolactone*
Inhibition of P-450 aromatase; blocks estrogen 
synthesis
Familial GnRH-independent sexual 
precocity with premature Leydig cell 
maturation
Ketoconazole*
Spironolactone* or flutamide and 
testolactone
Medroxyprogesterone acetate*
Inhibition of P-450c17 (mainly 17,20-lyase activity)
Antiandrogen inhibition of aromatase; blocks estrogen 
synthesis
Inhibition of testicular steroidogenesis
*If true precocious puberty develops, a GnRH agonist can be added.
FSH, Follicle-stimulating hormone; GnRH, gonadotropin-releasing hormone.
Modified from Grumbach MM, Kaplan SL. Recent advances in the diagnosis and management of sexual precocity. Acta Paediatr Jpn. 1988;30(Suppl):155.


--- PAGE 684 ---
663
CHAPTER 175  Thyroid Disease
Isolated Premature Adrenarche (Pubarche)
germ cell maturation do not respond to GnRH analogs but 
require treatment with an inhibitor of testosterone synthesis 
(e.g., ketoconazole), an antiandrogen (e.g., spironolactone), 
or an aromatase inhibitor (e.g., testolactone or letrozole). 
Patients with precocious puberty from a hormone-secreting 
tumor require surgical removal, if possible. The precocious 
puberty of the McCune-Albright syndrome is GnRH inde-
pendent and unresponsive to therapy with GnRH analog. 
Therapy is provided with testolactone and antiandrogens or 
antiestrogen, such as tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitor such 
as letrozole.
VARIATIONS IN PUBERTAL DEVELOPMENT
Isolated Premature Thelarche (Premature 
Breast Development)
 Decision-Making Algorithm
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Precocious Puberty in the Female
 Decision-Making Algorithm
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Gynecomastia
 Decision-Making Algorithms
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Amenorrhea
Precocious Puberty in the Male
Precocious Puberty in the Female
Benign premature thelarche is the isolated appearance of 
unilateral or bilateral breast tissue in girls, usually at ages 6 
months to 3 years. There are no other signs of puberty and no 
evidence of excessive estrogen effect (vaginal bleeding, thicken-
ing of the vaginal secretions, increased height velocity, or bone 
age acceleration). Ingestion or dermal application of estrogen-
containing compounds must be excluded. Laboratory investiga-
tions are not usually necessary, but a pelvic ultrasound study 
rarely may be indicated to exclude ovarian disease. Girls with 
this condition should be re-evaluated at intervals of 6-12 months 
to ensure that apparent premature thelarche is not the beginning 
of progression into precocious puberty. The prognosis is excel-
lent; if no progression occurs, no treatment other than reas-
surance is necessary.
Gynecomastia
In males breast tissue is termed gynecomastia, and it may occur 
to some degree in 45-75% of normal pubertal boys (see Chapter 
67). Androgens normally are converted to estrogen by aromatiza-
tion; in early puberty, only modest amounts of androgens are 
produced, and the estrogen effect can overwhelm the androgen 
effects at this stage. Later in pubertal development, the androgen 
production is so great that there is little effect from the estrogen 
produced by aromatization. Gynecomastia also can suggest the 
possibility of Klinefelter syndrome as puberty progresses. 
Prepubertal gynecomastia suggests an unusual source of estrogen 
either from exogenous sources (oral or dermal estrogen 
administration is possible from contamination of food or 
ointments) or from endogenous sources (from abnormal func-
tion of adrenal gland or ovary or from increased peripheral 
aromatization).
The isolated appearance of pubic hair before age 6-7 years in 
girls or before age 9 years in boys is termed premature pubarche, 
usually resulting from adrenarche. It is relatively common. If 
the pubic hair is associated with any other feature of virilization 
(clitoral or penile enlargement or advanced bone age) or other 
signs (acne, rapid growth, or voice change), a detailed investiga-
tion for a pathological cause of virilization is indicated. Measure-
ments of serum testosterone, 17-hydroxyprogesterone, and 
DHEAS are indicated to investigate the possibility of CAH. 
Ultrasound studies may reveal a hyperplastic adrenal gland or 
a virilizing adrenal or ovarian tumor. Most patients with isolated 
pubic hair do not have progressive virilization and simply have 
premature adrenarche (pubarche) resulting from premature 
activation of DHEA secretion from the adrenal gland. The 
skeletal maturation, as assessed by bone age, may be slightly 
advanced and the height slightly increased, but testosterone 
concentrations are normal. DHEA levels usually are high for 
prepubertal age but are consistent with Tanner (sexuality 
maturity rating) stages II and III. In girls, there have been 
studies linking premature adrenarche to the development of 
irregular menses or polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) later 
in adolescence.
CHAPTER 175 
Thyroid Disease
THYROID PHYSIOLOGY AND DEVELOPMENT
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), a tripeptide synthesized 
in the hypothalamus, stimulates the release of pituitary thyroid-
stimulating hormone (TSH). Pituitary TSH is a glycoprotein 
that stimulates the synthesis and release of thyroid hormones 
by the thyroid gland. Thyroid function develops in three stages. 
At the end of the first trimester, the gland descends from the 
floor of the primitive oral cavity to its definitive position in 
the anterior lower neck. The hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid 
axis becomes functional in the second trimester. Peripheral 
metabolism of thyroid hormones matures in the third trimester.
Thyroxine (T4), triiodothyronine (T3), and TSH do not cross 
the placenta in significant amounts. Concentrations in fetal 
serum reflect primarily fetal secretion and metabolism. Maternal 
thyroid antibodies, iodides (including radioactive iodides), 
and medications given to mothers to treat hyperthyroidism 
(methimazole and propylthiouracil) cross the placenta and affect 
fetal thyroid function. An infant born prematurely or with 
intrauterine growth restriction may have an interruption of the 
normal maturational process and appear to have hypothyroidism 
by standard tests (and newborn screen).


--- PAGE 685 ---
664
SECTION 23  Endocrinology
rather than T3 occurs in utero and in all forms of severe illness, 
including respiratory distress syndrome, fevers, anorexia, and 
starvation. Conversion from T4 to T3 increases immediately after 
birth and throughout life. T4 and T3 are noncovalently bound to 
a specific serum carrier protein, thyroxine-binding globulin, 
and to a lesser extent, albumin. Only small (<0.02%) fractions 
of T4 and T3 are not bound; free T4 (as it is converted to free 
T3) and free T3 are biologically active. Free T3 exerts metabolic 
effects and negative feedback on TSH release (Fig. 175.1).
The thyroid gland concentrates iodine and binds it to tyrosine 
molecules to produce either monoiodotyrosine or diiodotyrosine, 
with subsequent coupling of two tyrosines, T4 or T3. The major 
fraction of circulating T3 (approximately 2/3) is derived from 
peripheral deiodination of T4 to T3, but some is produced by 
the gland itself. The conversion of T4 to T3 requires the removal 
of one iodine from the outer ring of tyrosine; removing an 
iodine from the inner ring results in reverse T3, which has little 
biological effect. Preferential conversion of T4 to reverse T3 
OB-R
TSH
PITUITARY
TRH
Somatostatin
T3
T4
T4       T3
T4      T3
THYROID
NPY
AGRP
neurons
POMC
CART
neurons
TRH
neuron
Hypothalamus
CRH
Brain stem
catecholaminergic
inputs
Paraventricular
nucleus
Arcuate
nucleus
TEMPERATURE
ENERGY
STATE
Glucocorticoid receptors
Thyroid hormone receptors
FIGURE 175.1  Interrelationships of the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis. Thyroid-stimulating 
hormone (TSH) from the pituitary gland stimulates the secretion of thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine 
(T3) from the thyroid gland. These act at the pituitary gland level to control secretion of TSH by a 
negative feedback mechanism. In addition, T4 is metabolized to the potent T3 within the pituitary 
gland by a deiodinase. Secretion of TSH is stimulated by thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) from 
the hypothalamus and inhibited by somatostatin. Thyroid hormone acts at the hypothalamus to 
stimulate secretion of somatostatin (somatostatin acts as a negative signal to the pituitary secretion 
of TSH). CRH, Corticotropin-releasing hormone; OB-R, leptin receptor. (From Melmed S, Polonsky K, 
Kronenberg H, Larsen R, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. 10th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 
2003:101.)


--- PAGE 686 ---
665
CHAPTER 175  Thyroid Disease
incorporation or thyroid hormone biosynthesis or reflects the 
transplacental passage of antithyroid drugs given to the mother. 
Routine neonatal screening programs to measure cord blood 
or heel-stick TSH values occur in every state in the United 
States. An immediate confirmatory serum sample should be 
obtained from any infant having a positive result on a screening 
test. A low free T4 and high TSH confirm the finding.
Isolated secondary or tertiary hypothyroidism occurs in 1 
in 100,000 live births; the free T4 is normal to low, as is the 
TSH. When tertiary or secondary hypothyroidism is detected, 
assessment of other pituitary hormones and investigation of 
pituitary-hypothalamic anatomy via magnetic resonance imaging 
Serum TSH increases just after birth but soon decreases 
to lower values considered normal for later life. T4 secretion 
increases after birth as a result of the peak in TSH and because 
of maturation of thyroid metabolism. It is important to refer to 
age-adjusted normative data to interpret thyroid function tests 
properly, whether relative to making diagnoses of hyperthyroid-
ism or hypothyroidism or when adjusting therapy. Free T4 is 
the test of choice because it eliminates the effects of variation 
in protein binding, which can be substantial.
Table 175.1 summarizes laboratory test results in various 
types of thyroid abnormalities. In usual circumstances, plasma 
concentrations of TSH above the normal range indicate primary 
hypothyroidism and concentrations below the normal range 
most often indicate the presence of hyperthyroidism. Thyroid 
scans with 99m-pertechnetate or 123-I-iodine are occasionally 
indicated in the evaluation of pediatric thyroid disease. They can 
be useful in identifying thyroid agenesis or ectopic thyroid tissue.
THYROID DISORDERS
Hypothyroidism
TABLE 175.1  Laboratory Test Results in Various Types of Thyroid Function Abnormalities in Children*
ABNORMALITY
SERUM
SERUM TSH
SERUM TBG
TOTAL T4
FREE T4
Primary hypothyroidism
↓
↓
↑
N
Hypothalamic (TRH) tertiary hypothyroidism
↓
↓
↓
N
Pituitary (TSH) secondary hypothyroidism
↓
↓
↓
N
TBG deficiency
↓
N
N
↓
TBG excess
↑
N
N
↑
*TSH may be slightly elevated.
↓, Decreased; ↑, increased; N, Normal; T4, thyroxine; TBG, thyroxine-binding globulin; TRH, thyrotropin-releasing hormone; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone.
TABLE 175.2  Causes of Hypothyroidism in Infancy and 
Childhood
AGE GROUP
MANIFESTATION
CAUSE
Newborn
No goiter
Thyroid gland dysgenesis or 
ectopic location
Exposure to iodides
TSH deficiency
TRH deficiency
± Goiter
Inborn defect in hormone 
synthesis* or effect
Maternal goitrogen 
ingestion, including 
propylthiouracil, 
methimazole, iodides
Severe iodide deficiency 
(endemic)
Child
No goiter
Thyroid gland dysgenesis
Cystinosis
Hypothalamic-pituitary 
insufficiency
Surgical after thyrotoxicosis 
or other thyroid surgery
Goiter
Hashimoto thyroiditis: 
chronic lymphocytic 
thyroiditis
Inborn defect in hormone 
synthesis or effect
Goitrogenic drugs, infiltrative 
(sarcoid, lymphoma)
*Impaired iodide transport, defective thyroglobulin iodination, defective iodo-
tyrosine dehalogenase, or defective thyroglobulin or its coupling to 
iodotyrosine.
TRH, Thyrotropin-releasing hormone; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone.
 Decision-Making Algorithms
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Short Stature
Pubertal Delay
Precocious Puberty in the Male
Precocious Puberty in the Female
Hypothyroidism is diagnosed by a decreased serum free T4 
and may be the result of diseases of the thyroid gland (primary 
hypothyroidism), abnormalities of the pituitary gland (second-
ary), or abnormalities of the hypothalamus (tertiary). Hypo-
thyroidism is congenital or acquired and may or may not be 
associated with a goiter (Table 175.2).
Congenital Hypothyroidism
Congenital hypothyroidism occurs in approximately 1 in 
2,000-4,000 live births and is caused by dysgenesis (agenesis, 
aplasia, ectopia) or, less often, dyshormonogenesis (e.g., enzyme 
defects). Thyroid tissue usually is not palpable in these sporadic 
nongoitrous conditions. Dyshormonogenesis, disorders of 
intrathyroid metabolism, or goitrous congenital hypothyroidism 
occurs in about 1 in 30,000 live births. A goiter reflects an 
inborn error of metabolism in the pathway of iodide 


--- PAGE 687 ---
666
SECTION 23  Endocrinology
are indicated. Although not a hypothyroid condition, congenital 
thyroxine-binding globulin deficiency occurs in about 1 in 
10,000 live births and is associated with low serum total T4 
concentration, normal TSH, and normal serum free T4. This is a 
euthyroid condition and does not require treatment with thyroid 
hormone because it is merely a binding protein abnormality. 
It is commonly X-linked dominant.
Clinical manifestations of congenital hypothyroidism in 
the immediate newborn period usually are subtle but become 
more evident weeks or months after birth. By then it is too late 
to ensure that there is not a detriment to the infant’s cognitive 
development. Newborn screening is crucial to make an early 
diagnosis and initiate thyroid replacement therapy by younger 
than 1 month of age. Findings at various stages after birth include 
hypothermia, acrocyanosis, respiratory distress, large fontanels, 
abdominal distention, lethargy and poor feeding, prolonged 
jaundice, edema, umbilical hernia, mottled skin, constipation, 
large tongue, dry skin, and hoarse cry. Thyroid hormones are 
crucial for maturation and differentiation of tissues, such as 
bone and brain (most thyroid-dependent brain maturation 
occurs in the first 2-3 years after birth; Table 175.3).
When treatment (with levothyroxine) is initiated within 1 
month or less after birth, the prognosis for normal intellectual 
development is excellent. State screening programs usually allow 
for therapy within 1-2 weeks of birth. If therapy is instituted after 
6 months when the signs of severe hypothyroidism are present, 
the likelihood of normal intellectual function is markedly 
decreased. Growth improves after thyroid replacement even in 
late diagnosed cases. The dose of levothyroxine changes with age; 
10-15 µg/kg of levothyroxine is used for a newborn, but about 
3 µg/kg is used later in childhood. In neonatal hypothyroidism, 
the goal is to bring the serum free T4 rapidly into the upper 
half of the range of normal. Suppression of TSH is not seen 
and not necessary in all cases because such suppression may 
lead to excessive doses of levothyroxine.
Acquired Hypothyroidism
The etiology of acquired hypothyroidism is presented in Table 
175.2. The clinical manifestations may be subtle. Hypothyroidism 
should be suspected in any child who has a decline in growth 
velocity, especially if not associated with weight loss (see Table 
175.3). The most common cause of acquired hypothyroidism 
in older children in the United States is lymphocytic autoimmune 
thyroiditis (Hashimoto thyroiditis). In many areas of the world, 
iodine deficiency is the etiology of endemic goiter (endemic 
cretinism). The failure of the thyroid gland may be heralded 
by an increase of TSH before T4 levels decrease. In contrast to 
untreated congenital hypothyroidism, acquired hypothyroidism 
is not a cause of permanent developmental delay.
Hashimoto Thyroiditis
Also known as autoimmune or lymphocytic thyroiditis, Hashi-
moto thyroiditis is a common cause of goiter and acquired 
thyroid disease in older children and adolescents. A family 
history of thyroid disease is present in 25-35% of patients. The 
etiology is an autoimmune process targeted against the thyroid 
gland with lymphocytic infiltration and lymphoid follicle and 
germinal center formation preceding fibrosis and atrophy.
Clinical manifestations include a firm, nontender euthyroid, 
hypothyroid, or, rarely, hyperthyroid (hashitoxicosis) diffuse 
goiter with a pebble-like surface. See Table 175.3 for signs and 
symptoms, which can be diverse. Onset typically occurs after 
TABLE 175.3  Symptoms and Signs of Hypothyroidism
ECTODERMAL
Poor growth
Dull facies: thick lips, large tongue, depressed nasal bridge, 
periorbital edema
Dry scaly skin
Sparse brittle hair
Diminished sweating
Carotenemia
Vitiligo
CIRCULATORY
Sinus bradycardia/heart block
Cold extremities
Cold intolerance
Pallor
ECG changes: low-voltage QRS complex
NEUROMUSCULAR
Muscle weakness
Hypotonia: constipation, potbelly
Umbilical hernia
Myxedema coma (carbon dioxide narcosis, hypothermia)
Pseudohypertrophy of muscles
Myalgia
Physical and mental lethargy
Developmental delay
Delayed relaxation of reflexes
Paresthesias (nerve entrapment: carpal tunnel syndrome)
Cerebellar ataxia
SKELETAL
Delayed bone age
Epiphyseal dysgenesis, increased upper-to-lower segment ratio
METABOLIC
Myxedema
Serous effusions (pleural, pericardial, ascites)
Hoarse voice (cry)
Weight gain
Menstrual irregularity
Arthralgia
Elevated CK
Macrocytosis (anemia)
Hypercholesterolemia
Hyperprolactinemia
Precocious puberty in severe cases
CK, Creatine kinase; ECG, electrocardiographic.


--- PAGE 688 ---
667
CHAPTER 175  Thyroid Disease
homogeneous goiter is usually present. Many patients complain 
of neck fullness. Thyroid gland enlargement is best visualized 
with the neck only slightly extended and with the examiner 
lateral to the patient. Palpation of the thyroid gland is best 
performed with the examiner’s hands around the neck from 
the back. The patient swallows so that the examiner can feel 
and examine the size, consistency, nodularity, and motion of 
the gland. The examiner should watch the patient swallow to 
note any discernible enlargement or asymmetry of the thyroid 
lobes. Auscultation may reveal a bruit over the gland that needs 
to be differentiated from a carotid bruit.
Treatment
Three treatment choices are available: pharmacological, radioac-
tive iodine, and surgical.
Drugs
Medical therapy to block thyroid hormone synthesis con­
sists of methimazole (0.4-0.6 mg/kg/day once or twice daily) 
 Decision-Making Algorithm
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Neck Masses
TABLE 175.4  Clinical Manifestations of Hyperthyroidism
ASSOCIATED CHANGE
SIGN/SYMPTOM
Increased  
catecholamine  
effects
Nervousness
Palpitations
Tachycardia
Atrial arrhythmias
Systolic hypertension
Tremor
Brisk reflexes
Hypermetabolism
Increased sweating
Shiny, smooth skin
Heat intolerance
Fatigue
Weight loss—increased appetite
Increased bowel movement (loose 
stools)
Hyperkinesis
Myopathy
Weakness
Periodic paralysis
Cardiac failure—dyspnea
Miscellaneous
Proptosis, stare, exophthalmos, lid 
lag, ophthalmopathy
Hair loss
Inability to concentrate
Personality change (emotional 
lability)
Goiter
Thyroid bruit
Onycholysis
Painful gland*
Acute thyroid storm (hyperpyrexia, 
tachycardia, coma, high-output 
heart failure, shock)
*Unusual except in subacute thyroiditis with hyperthyroid phase.
6 years of age with a peak incidence in adolescence with a 
female predominance. Associated autoimmune diseases include 
celiac disease, type 1 diabetes mellitus, adrenal insufficiency, 
and hypoparathyroidism. Autoimmune polyglandular syn-
drome type I consists of hypoparathyroidism, Addison disease, 
mucocutaneous candidiasis, and hypothyroidism. Autoimmune 
polyglandular syndrome type II consists of Addison disease, 
type 1 diabetes mellitus, and frequently hypothyroidism. Trisomy 
21 and Turner syndrome are predisposed to the development 
of autoimmune thyroiditis.
The diagnosis may be confirmed by serum antithyroid 
peroxidase (previously antimicrosomal) and antithyroglobulin 
antibodies. Neither biopsy nor thyroid scan is indicated in 
Hashimoto thyroiditis, although a thyroid scan with reduced 
uptake may differentiate hashitoxicosis from Graves disease.
Treatment with thyroid hormone sufficient to normalize 
TSH and free T4 is indicated for hypothyroidism in Hashimoto 
thyroiditis. Patients without manifestation of hypothyroidism 
require thyroid function testing (serum TSH and free T4) every 
6-12 months to detect the later development of hypothyroidism. 
Goiter with a normal TSH usually is not an indication for 
treatment.
Hyperthyroidism
Graves Disease
Most children with hyperthyroidism have Graves disease, the 
autonomous functioning of the thyroid caused by autoantibodies 
(thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulins [TSIs]) stimulating the 
thyroid. The resulting excessive synthesis, release, and peripheral 
metabolism of thyroid hormones produce the clinical features. 
Hashimoto thyroiditis and thyrotoxicosis are on a continuum 
of autoimmune diseases; there is overlap in their immunological 
findings.
Antithyroid peroxidase and antithyroglobulin antibodies may 
be present in thyrotoxicosis, although the values are usually 
lower than in Hashimoto thyroiditis. Exceptionally high titers 
of antibodies may indicate the thyrotoxic phase of Hashimoto 
thyroiditis with the subsequent evolution toward permanent 
hypothyroidism. In Graves disease, serum free T4, free T3, or 
both levels are elevated, whereas TSH is suppressed. Rare causes 
of hyperthyroidism include McCune-Albright syndrome, thyroid 
nodule (often an adenoma), TSH hypersecretion, subacute 
thyroiditis, and iodine or thyroid hormone ingestion.
Clinical Manifestations
Graves disease presents as hyperthyroidism (Table 175.4) and 
is about five times more common in girls than in boys with a 
peak incidence in adolescence. Personality changes, mood 
instability, and poor school performance are common initial 
problems. Tremor, anxiety, inability to concentrate, and weight 
loss may be insidious and confused with a psychological disorder 
until thyroid function tests reveal the elevated serum free T4 
level. In rare cases, serum free T4 may be near-normal, whereas 
serum T3 is selectively elevated (T3 toxicosis). A firm 


--- PAGE 689 ---
668
SECTION 23  Endocrinology
Congenital Hyperthyroidism
This disorder results from transplacental passage of maternal 
TSIs and may be masked for several days until the short-lived 
effects of transplacental maternal antithyroid medication wear off 
(assuming the mother was receiving such medication), at which 
time the effects of TSIs are observed. Irritability, tachycardia 
(often with signs of cardiac failure simulating cardiomyopathy), 
polycythemia, craniosynostosis, bone age advancement, poor 
feeding, and failure to thrive are the clinical hallmarks. This 
condition may be anticipated if the mother is known to be 
thyrotoxic or has an elevated TSI during third trimester of 
pregnancy. Cure of hyperthyroidism before pregnancy (surgery 
or radioiodine treatment) limits or curtails T4 production but 
not the underlying immune disturbance producing TSIs; thus 
the infant still may be affected, at least transiently.
Treatment for a severely affected neonate includes methima-
zole and, as needed, a β blocker to help decrease symptoms. 
Because the half-life of the immunoglobulin is several weeks, 
spontaneous resolution of neonatal thyrotoxicosis resulting from 
transplacental passage of TSIs usually occurs by 2-3 months 
of age. Observation without treatment is indicated in patients 
who are minimally affected.
NODULES/TUMORS OF THE THYROID
About 2% of children develop solitary thyroid nodules, most 
of which are benign. Evaluation of a nodule includes thyroid 
function tests, neck ultrasound, and, if needed, fine-needle 
aspiration (FNA). Ultrasound guidance may be needed for 
aspiration of small nodules or those not palpable. Nodules 
found to be benign on FNA may be monitored through clinical 
exam and ultrasound.
Carcinoma of the thyroid is rare in children (1% of all 
pediatric cancers in the 5- to 9-year-old age group and up to 
7% of cancers in the 15- to 19-year-old age group). Papillary 
and follicular carcinomas represent 90% of childhood thyroid 
cancers. A history of therapeutic head or neck irradiation 
or radiation exposure from nuclear accidents predisposes a 
child to thyroid cancer. Carcinoma usually presents as a firm 
to hard, painless, nonfunctional solitary nodule and may 
spread to adjacent lymph nodes. Rapid growth, hoarseness 
(recurrent laryngeal nerve involvement), and lung metastasis 
may be present. If the nodule is solid on ultrasound, is cold 
on radioiodine scanning, and feels hard, the likelihood of a 
carcinoma is high. Excisional biopsy usually is performed, but 
FNA biopsy also may be diagnostic.
Treatment includes total thyroidectomy, selective regional 
node dissection, and radioablation with 131I for residual or 
recurrent disease. The prognosis is usually good if the disease 
is diagnosed early.
Medullary carcinoma of the thyroid may be asymptomatic 
except for a mass. Diagnosis is based on the presence of elevated 
calcitonin levels, either in the basal state or after pentagastrin 
stimulation (difficult to obtain) and histological examination. 
This tumor most often occurs with multiple endocrine neo-
plasia 2a or 2b (MEN), possibly in a familial pattern. In some 
families, the presence of mutations of the RET protooncogene 
is predictive of the development of medullary carcinoma of 
the thyroid. The location of the mutation can help determine 
when removal of the thyroid is warranted. Genetic screening 
of other members of the family is indicated after a proband 
is recognized. Prophylactic thyroidectomy is indicated for the 
family members with the same allele.
or propylthiouracil (5-7 mg/kg/day divided every 8 hours). 
Both medications are equally effective; however, propylthio-
uracil is no longer a first-line therapy secondary to concerns 
of severe liver injury and acute liver failure. A β blocker, 
such as propranolol or atenolol, is started if symptoms are 
severe to control cardiac manifestations and is tapered as 
the methimazole takes effect. Antithyroid medication is 
usually continued for 1-2 years because the remission rate 
is approximately 25% per year. In patients complying with 
the treatment regimen, the 2-year course of treatment can 
be repeated. Medication should suppress thyroid function to 
normal without the need to add thyroid hormone replacement 
to normalize serum free T4. Complications of methimazole 
are muscle pain, rash, granulocytopenia, and jaundice. The 
granulocytopenia is an idiosyncratic complication of rapid 
onset, which is observed only in the early months after 
institution of antithyroid medication and requires monitoring 
the complete blood count. If a suppressed white blood cell 
count is observed, antithyroid therapy must be discontinued. 
This potentially lethal rare complication affects 3 in 10,000 
users a year. After resolution, the other of the two antithyroid 
medications can be started because there is usually less than 
a 50% chance of a similar reaction from the other medication. 
Iodine administration, which may suppress thyroid func-
tion but becomes ineffective in a few weeks, is sometimes 
used as a preparation for surgery, but never for long-term 
therapy.
Radioiodine
Radioiodine (131I) is slower in exerting therapeutic effects, may 
require repeated dosing, and is likely to cause permanent 
hypothyroidism. Hypothyroidism is the desired outcome because 
it is easier and safer to treat than continued hyperthyroidism. 
Although studies reveal no long-term consequences, concern 
remains about possible sequelae in children. This method of 
treatment is entering the mainstream for children and adoles-
cents. Radioiodine given to a pregnant teenager renders the 
fetus hypothyroid and is contraindicated.
Surgery
Surgical treatment consists of partial or complete thyroidectomy. 
Risks associated with thyroidectomy include the use of anesthesia 
and the possibility that the thyroid removal will be excessive, 
causing hypothyroidism, or that it will be inadequate, resulting 
in persistent hyperthyroidism. In addition, keloid formation, 
recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy, and hypoparathyroidism 
(transient postoperative or permanent) may occur. Thyroid 
storm caused by the release of large amounts of preformed 
hormone is a serious but rare complication. Even with optimal 
immediate postoperative results, patients may become hypo-
thyroid within 10 years.
Thyroid Storm
Thyroid storm (see Table 175.4) is a rare medical emergency 
consisting of tachycardia, disorientation, elevated blood 
pressure, and hyperthermia. Treatment includes reducing 
the hyperthermia with a cooling blanket and administering 
a β blocker to control the tachycardia, hypertension, and 
autonomic hyperfunction symptoms. Iodine may be given to 
block thyroid hormone release after an antithyroid medication 
is started. Hydrocortisone may be indicated for relative adrenal 
insufficiency and therapy for heart failure includes diuretics and 
digoxin.


--- PAGE 690 ---
669
CHAPTER 176  Disorders of Parathyroid Bone and Mineral Endocrinology
hyperpnea caused by anxiety or from hyperventilation related 
to physical exertion. Hypoproteinemia may lead to a false 
suggestion of hypocalcemia because the serum total calcium 
level is low even though the ionized Ca2+ remains normal. It 
is best to measure serum ionized calcium if hypocalcemia or 
hypercalcemia is suspected.
Primary hypoparathyroidism causes hypocalcemia but does 
not cause rickets. The etiology of primary hypoparathyroidism 
includes the following:
1.	 Congenital malformation (e.g., DiGeorge syndrome or other 
complex syndromes) resulting from developmental abnor-
malities of the third and fourth branchial arches (see Chapters 
143 and 144)
2.	 Surgical procedures, such as thyroidectomy or parathyroid-
ectomy, in which parathyroid tissue is removed either 
deliberately or as a complication of surgery for another 
goal
3.	 Autoimmunity, which may destroy the parathyroid gland
Pseudohypoparathyroidism (all with hypocalcemia and 
hyperphosphatemia) may occur in one of four forms as follows:
1.	 Type Ia: an abnormality of the Gsa protein linking the PTH 
receptor to adenylate cyclase; biologically active PTH is 
secreted in great quantities, but does not stimulate its 
receptor
2.	 Type Ib: normal phenotype, normal Gsa with abnormalities 
in the production of adenylate cyclase
3.	 Type Ic: abnormal phenotype, normal production of adenyl-
ate cyclase, but a distal defect eliminates the effects of 
PTH
4.	 Type II: normal phenotype, normal production of adenylate 
cyclase, with a postreceptor defect, close to type Ib
Pseudohypoparathyroidism is an autosomal dominant condi-
tion that may present at birth or later. Pseudohypoparathyroidism 
is associated with Albright hereditary osteodystrophy, whose 
clinical manifestations include short stature, stocky body habitus, 
round facies, short fourth and fifth metacarpals, calcification of 
the basal ganglia, subcutaneous calcification, and developmental 
delay. Albright hereditary osteodystrophy may be inherited 
separately so that a patient may have a normal appearance 
with hypocalcemia or may have the Albright hereditary osteo-
dystrophy phenotype with normal serum calcium, phosphate, 
PTH, and response to PTH.
Transient neonatal hypocalcemia. During the first 3 days 
after birth, serum calcium concentrations normally decline in 
response to withdrawal of the maternal calcium supply via the 
placenta. Sluggish PTH response in a neonate may result in 
a transient hypocalcemia. Hypocalcemia caused by decreased 
PTH release is found in infants of mothers with hyperpara-
thyroidism and hypercalcemia; the latter suppresses fetal 
PTH release, causing transient hypoparathyroidism in the 
neonatal period.
Normal serum magnesium concentrations are required for 
normal parathyroid gland function and action. Hypomagnese-
mia may cause a secondary hypoparathyroidism, which responds 
poorly to therapies other than magnesium replacement.
The etiology of hypocalcemia usually can be discerned by 
combining features of the clinical presentation with determina-
tions of serum ionized calcium, phosphate, alkaline phosphatase, 
PTH (preferably at a time when the calcium is low), magnesium, 
and albumin. If the PTH concentration is not appropriately 
elevated in relation to the low serum calcium, hypoparathy-
roidism (transient, primary, or caused by hypomagnesemia) 
is present. Vitamin D stores can be estimated by measuring 
CHAPTER 176 
Disorders of Parathyroid Bone 
and Mineral Endocrinology
PARATHYROID HORMONE AND VITAMIN D
Calcium and phosphate are regulated mainly by diet and three 
hormones: parathyroid hormone (PTH), vitamin D, and cal-
citonin. PTH is secreted in response to a decrease in serum 
ionized calcium level. PTH attaches to its membrane receptor 
then acts via adenylate cyclase to mobilize calcium from bone 
into the serum and to enhance fractional reabsorption of calcium 
by the kidney while inducing phosphate excretion; all increase 
the serum calcium concentration and decrease serum phosphate. 
Lack of PTH effect is heralded by low serum calcium in the 
presence of elevated phosphate for age. PTH stimulates vitamin 
D secretion by increasing renal 1α-hydroxylase activity and 
acts indirectly to elevate serum calcium concentration by 
stimulating the production of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D from 
25-hydroxyvitamin D. Calcitonin increases the deposition of 
calcium into bone; in normal states the effect is subtle, but 
calcitonin may be used temporarily to suppress extremely 
elevated serum calcium values.
1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D enhances calcium absorption from 
the gastrointestinal tract, increasing serum calcium levels and 
bone mineralization. Vitamin D is derived from exposure of 
the skin to ultraviolet rays (usually via the sun) or from oral 
ingestion. It is modified first to 25-hydroxyvitamin D in the 
liver and then 1α-hydroxylated to the metabolically active form 
(1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D) in the kidney. The serum concentra-
tion of 25-hydroxyvitamin D is a better reflection of vitamin 
D sufficiency than the measurement of 1,25-hydroxyvitamin 
D (see Chapter 31).
HYPOCALCEMIA
 Decision-Making Algorithm
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Hypocalcemia
The clinical manifestations of hypocalcemia result from 
increased neuromuscular irritability and include muscle cramps, 
carpopedal spasm (tetany), weakness, paresthesia, laryngospasm, 
and seizure-like activity. Tetany can be detected by the Chvostek 
sign (facial spasms produced by lightly tapping over the facial 
nerve just in front of the ear) or by the Trousseau sign (carpal 
spasms exhibited when arterial blood flow to the hand is 
occluded for 3-5 minutes with a blood pressure cuff inflated 
to 15 mm Hg above systolic blood pressure). Total serum calcium 
concentration is usually measured, although a determination 
of serum ionized calcium, the biologically active form, is 
preferable. Albumin is the major reservoir of protein-bound 
calcium. Disorders that alter plasma pH or serum albumin 
concentration must be considered when circulating calcium 
concentrations are being evaluated. The fraction of ionized 
calcium is inversely related to plasma pH; alkalosis can pre-
cipitate hypocalcemia by lowering ionized calcium without 
changing total serum calcium. Alkalosis may result from 

