
--- PAGE 659 ---
638
SECTION 23  Endocrinology
mediobasal hypothalamus, from which they can exert effects 
on water balance, even in the absence of the posterior pituitary 
gland.
The assessment of pituitary function may be determined 
by measuring some of the specific pituitary hormone in the 
basal state; other assessments require the measurement after 
stimulation. Indirect assessment of pituitary function can be 
obtained by measuring serum concentrations of the target gland 
hormones (Table 170.1). Several tests of pituitary function are 
listed in Table 170.2.
HYPOTHALAMUS
PITUITARY
SRIF
(somatostatin)
GHRH
CRH
GH
ACTH
Prolactin
FSH, LH
TSH
Dopamine
GnRH
TRH
Growth
Cortisol
Lactation
T4, T3
Sex steroids
Inhibin
Insulin-like growth factors
(and binding proteins)
Gametogenesis
FIGURE 170.2  Hormonal influences of the 
hypothalamus and pituitary gland. Solid line rep-
resents stimulatory influence; dotted line represents 
inhibitory influence. ACTH, Adrenocorticotropic 
hormone; CRH, corticotropin-releasing hormone 
or CRF; FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone; GH, 
growth hormone; GHRH, GH-releasing hormone 
or GRF; GnRH, gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
or luteinizing hormone releasing factor, LRF or 
LHRH; LH, luteinizing hormone; SRIF, somatotropin 
release-inhibiting factor, somatostatin or SS; TRH, 
thyrotropin-releasing hormone or TRF; TSH, thyroid-
stimulating hormone; T3, triiodothyronine; T4, 
thyroxine. 
TABLE 170.1  Diagnostic Evaluation for Hypopituitarism
MANIFESTATION
CAUSE
TESTS*
Growth failure, hypothyroidism, or 
both
GH deficiency, TRH/TSH deficiency, or both
Provocative GH tests, free T4, bone age, IGF-1, 
IGF-BP3
Hypoglycemia
GH deficiency, ACTH insufficiency, or both
Provocative GH tests, test of ACTH secretion, 
IGF-1, IGFBP3
Micropenis, pubertal delay or arrest
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism with or 
without GH deficiency
Sex steroids (E2, testosterone), basal LH and FSH 
(analyzed by ultrasensitive assays) or after LHRH 
administration, provocative GH tests, IGF-1, 
IGFBP3
Polyuria, polydipsia
ADH deficiency
Urine analysis (specific gravity), serum electrolytes, 
urine and serum osmolality, water deprivation test
*Each patient with hypopituitarism should have CNS MRI as part of evaluation to determine the etiology of the condition.
ACTH, Adrenocorticotropic hormone; ADH, Antidiuretic hormone; CNS, central nervous system; E2, estradiol; FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone; GH, growth hormone; 
GnRH, gonadotropin-releasing hormone; IGF-1, insulin-like growth factor-1; IGF-BP3, insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 3; LH, luteinizing hormone; LHRH, 
luteinizing hormone releasing hormone; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; TRH, thyrotropin-releasing hormone; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone; T4, thyroxine.
 Decision-Making Algorithms
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Visual Impairment and Leukocoria
Amenorrhea
Pubertal Delay
Polyuria
DISORDERS OF THE 
HYPOTHALAMIC-PITUITARY AXIS


--- PAGE 660 ---
639
CHAPTER 171  Diabetes Mellitus
CHAPTER 171 
Diabetes Mellitus
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is characterized by hyperglycemia and 
glycosuria and is an end-point of a few disease processes (Table 
171.1). The most common type occurring in childhood is type 
1 DM (T1D), which is caused by autoimmune destruction of 
the insulin-producing β cells (islets) of the pancreas, leading 
to permanent insulin deficiency. Type 2 DM (T2D) results 
from insulin resistance and relative insulin deficiency usually 
in the context of exogenous obesity. The incidence of T1D and 
T2D in the United States is increasing. Less common types of 
diabetes result from genetic defects of the insulin receptor or 
inherited abnormalities in sensing of ambient glucose concentra-
tion by pancreatic β cells (see Table 171.1).
DEFINITION
A diagnosis of DM is made based on four glucose abnormalities 
that may need to be confirmed by repeat testing: (1) Fasting 
serum glucose concentration ≥126 mg/dL, (2) a random venous 
plasma glucose ≥200 mg/dL with symptoms of hyperglycemia, 
(3) an abnormal oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) with a 
2-hour postprandial serum glucose concentration ≥200 mg/
dL, and (4) a HgbA1c ≥6.5%.
A patient is considered to have impaired fasting glucose 
if fasting serum glucose concentration is 100-125 mg/dL or 
impaired glucose tolerance if 2-hour plasma glucose following 
an OGTT is 140-199 mg/dL. Sporadic hyperglycemia can occur 
in children, usually in the setting of an intercurrent illness. 
When the hyperglycemic episode is clearly related to an illness 
Hypothalamic deficiency leads to a decrease in most 
pituitary hormone secretions but may lead to an increase in 
prolactin secretion. Destructive lesions of the pituitary gland or 
hypothalamus are more common in childhood than increased 
pituitary secretion of various hormones. A craniopharyngioma, 
a tumor of the Rathke pouch, may descend into the sella turcica, 
causing erosion of the bone and destruction of pituitary and 
hypothalamic tissue. Acquired hypopituitarism also may result 
from pituitary infections; from infiltration (Langerhans cell 
histiocytosis [histiocytosis X], lymphoma, and sarcoidosis); after 
radiation therapy or trauma to the CNS; and as a consequence 
of autoimmunity against the pituitary gland.
Congenital hypopituitarism can be caused by the absence 
of hypothalamic-releasing factors. Without hypothalamic 
stimulation, the pituitary gland does not release its hormones. 
Congenital defects associated with hypopituitarism range from 
holoprosencephaly (cyclopia, cebocephaly, orbital hypotelorism) 
to cleft palate (6% of cases of cleft palate are associated with 
GH deficiency). Optic nerve hypoplasia, formerly known as 
septooptic dysplasia, may result in significant visual impair-
ment with pendular (“roving”) nystagmus (inability to focus 
on a target) in addition to varying degrees of hypopituitarism. 
The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings of congenital 
hypopituitarism may include an ectopic posterior pituitary gland 
bright spot, the appearance of a pituitary stalk transection, and/
or small pituitary gland.
TABLE 170.2  Anterior Pituitary Hormone Function Testing
RANDOM HORMONE MEASUREMENTS
PROVOCATIVE OR OTHER TESTS
TARGET HORMONE 
MEASUREMENT
GH (not useful as a random determination 
except in newborns, and in GH resistance or 
in pituitary gigantism)
Arginine (a weak stimulus)
L-Dopa (useful clinically)
Insulin-induced hypoglycemia (a dangerous but 
accurate test)
IGF-1, IGF-BP3 (affected by 
malnutrition as well as GH excess)
Clonidine (useful clinically)
GHRH
12- to 24-hr integrated GH levels (of questionable 
utility)
ACTH (early morning sample useful only if in 
high-normal range)
Cortisol after insulin-induced hypoglycemia (a 
dangerous but accurate test)
8 A.M. cortisol
24-hr urinary free cortisol
ACTH stimulation test (may differentiate ACTH 
deficiency from primary adrenal insufficiency)
TSH*
LH, FSH*
TRH (not commonly performed)
GnRH (difficult to interpret in prepubertal subjects)
FT4
Testosterone/estradiol
Prolactin (elevated in hypothalamic disease 
and decreased in pituitary disease)
TRH (not commonly performed)
None
*New supersensitive assays allow determination of abnormally low values found in hypopituitarism.
ACTH, Adrenocorticotropic hormone; CRH, corticotropin-releasing hormone; FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone; FT4, free thyroxine; GH, growth hormone; GnRH, 
gonadotropin-releasing hormone; GHRH, growth hormone-releasing hormone; IGF-1, insulin-like growth factor-1; IGF-BP3, insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 
3; L-dopa, L-dihydroxyphenylalanine; LH, luteinizing hormone; TRH, thyrotropin-releasing hormone; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone.


--- PAGE 661 ---
640
SECTION 23  Endocrinology
presence of diabetes susceptibility genes, an unknown envi-
ronmental insult presumably triggers the autoimmune process. 
A variety of studies have produced conflicting data regarding 
a host of environmental factors. These include cow’s milk feeding 
at an early age, viral infectious agents (coxsackie virus, cyto-
megalovirus, mumps, rubella), vitamin D deficiency, and 
perinatal factors. T1D is thought to be primarily a T cell–
mediated disease.
Antibodies to islet cell antigens may be seen months to 
years before the onset of β cell dysfunction (Fig. 171.1). These 
include islet cell antibodies, insulin autoantibodies, antibod-
ies to tyrosine phosphatase IA-2, antibodies to glutamic acid 
decarboxylase, and others. The risk for diabetes increases 
with the number of antibodies detected in the serum. In 
individuals with only one detectable antibody, the risk is only 
10-15% while in individuals with three or more antibodies 
the risk is 55-90%. When 80-90% of the β cell mass has been 
destroyed, the remaining β cell mass is insufficient to maintain 
euglycemia and clinical manifestations of diabetes result (see 
Fig. 171.1).
Epidemiology
The annual incidence of T1D is increasing steadily but with 
significant geographic differences. In the United States, the 
annual incidence is approximately 20 in 100,000. The annual 
incidence in children ranges from a high of 40 in 100,000 among 
Scandinavian populations to less than 1 in 100,000 in China. 
The prevalence of T1D in the United States is highest in non-
Hispanic whites followed by African Americans, Hispanics, 
and American Indians.
Genetic determinants play a role in the susceptibility to T1D, 
although the mode of inheritance is complex and multigenic. 
Siblings or offspring of patients with diabetes have a risk of 
2-8% for the development of diabetes; an identical twin has a 
30-50% risk. The human leukocyte antigen (HLA) region on 
chromosome 6 provides the strongest determinant of susceptibil-
ity, accounting for approximately 40% of familial inheritance 
of T1D. Specific class II DR and DQ HLA alleles (HLA DR3 
TABLE 171.1  Classification of Diabetes Mellitus in 
Children and Adolescents
TYPE
COMMENT
TYPE 1 (INSULIN-DEPENDENT)
Transient neonatal
Manifests immediately after birth; lasts 1-3 mo
Permanent 
neonatal
Other pancreatic defects possible
Classic type 1
Glycosuria, ketonuria, hyperglycemia, islet 
cell positive; genetic component
TYPE 2 (NON-INSULIN-DEPENDENT)
Secondary
Cystic fibrosis, hemochromatosis, drugs 
(L-asparaginase, tacrolimus)
Adult type (classic)
Associated with obesity, insulin resistance; 
genetic component
OTHER
Gestational 
diabetes
Maturity-onset 
diabetes of youth
Mitochondrial 
diabetes
Abnormal glucose tolerance during 
pregnancy only, which reverts to normal 
postpartum; increased risk for later onset of 
diabetes
Autosomal dominant, onset before age of 25 
years; not associated with obesity or 
autoimmunity
Single-gene mutations include hepatocyte 
nuclear factors 1β,1α, 4α; glucokinase; insulin 
promoter factor 1
Associated with deafness and other 
neurological defects, maternal 
transmission—mtDNA point mutations
0
50
100
 β cell mass (% of max)
0
Time (yr) 
GENETIC PREDISPOSITION
IMMUNOLOGICAL ABNORMALITIES
Progressive impairment
in insulin release
Overt
diabetes
“Honeymoon”
period
Normal insulin
release
Birth
FIGURE 171.1  Schematic representation of the autoimmune evolution of diabetes in genetically 
predisposed individuals. 
or other physiological stress, the probability of incipient diabetes 
is small (<5%).
TYPE 1 DIABETES MELLITUS
Etiology
T1D results from the autoimmune destruction of insulin-
producing β cells (islets) of the pancreas. In addition to the 


--- PAGE 662 ---
641
CHAPTER 171  Diabetes Mellitus
decreased tissue perfusion. Hyperglycemia causes an osmotic 
diuresis that is initially compensated for by increased fluid 
intake. As the hyperglycemia and diuresis worsen, most patients 
are unable to maintain the large fluid intake and dehydration 
occurs. Vomiting and increased insensible water losses caused 
by tachypnea can worsen the dehydration. Electrolyte abnormali-
ties occur through a loss of electrolytes in the urine and 
transmembrane alterations resulting from acidosis. As hydrogen 
ions accumulate as a result of ketoacidosis, intracellular potas-
sium is exchanged for hydrogen ions. Serum concentrations 
of potassium increase initially with acidosis then decrease as 
serum potassium is cleared by the kidney. Depending on the 
duration of ketoacidosis, serum potassium concentrations at 
diagnosis may be increased, normal, or decreased, but intracel-
lular potassium concentrations are depleted. A decreased serum 
potassium concentration is an ominous sign of total body 
potassium depletion. Phosphate depletion also can occur as a 
result of the increased renal phosphate excretion required for 
elimination of excess hydrogen ions. Sodium depletion is also 
common in ketoacidosis resulting from renal losses of sodium 
caused by osmotic diuresis and from gastrointestinal losses 
from vomiting (Fig. 171.2).
Clinical Presentation
and HLA DR4) increase the risk of developing T1D, whereas 
other specific HLA alleles exert a protective effect. More than 
90% of children with T1D possess HLA DR3 alleles, HLA DR4 
alleles, or both. The insulin gene region variable number tandem 
repeat on chromosome 11 is also linked to T1D susceptibility. 
There is evidence for association, beyond HLA, of more than 
100 other loci with T1D. Genetic factors do not fully account 
for susceptibility to T1D; environmental factors also play 
a role.
Clinical Manifestations
 Decision-Making Algorithms
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Polyuria
Failure to Thrive
Hyperglycemia results when insulin secretory capacity becomes 
inadequate to enhance peripheral glucose uptake and to suppress 
hepatic and renal glucose production. Insulin deficiency usually 
first causes postprandial hyperglycemia and then fasting 
hyperglycemia. Ketogenesis is a sign of more complete insulin 
deficiency. Lack of suppression of gluconeogenesis and 
glycogenolysis further exacerbates hyperglycemia, while fatty 
acid oxidation generates the ketone bodies: β-hydroxybutyrate, 
acetoacetate, and acetone. Protein stores in muscle and fat stores 
in adipose tissue are metabolized to provide substrates for 
gluconeogenesis and fatty acid oxidation.
Glycosuria occurs when the serum glucose concentration 
exceeds the renal threshold for glucose reabsorption (from 
160 to 190 mg/dL). Glycosuria causes an osmotic diuresis 
(including obligate loss of sodium, potassium, and other 
electrolytes) leading to dehydration. Polydipsia occurs as the 
patient attempts to compensate for the excess fluid losses. Weight 
loss results from the persistent catabolic state and the loss of 
calories through glycosuria and ketonuria. The classic presen-
tation of T1D includes polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, and 
weight loss.
DIABETIC KETOACIDOSIS
If the clinical features of new-onset T1D are not detected, 
diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) will occur. DKA may also occur 
in patients with known T1D if insulin injections are omitted 
or during an intercurrent illness when greater insulin require-
ments are unmet in the presence of elevated concentrations of 
the counter-regulatory and stress hormones (glucagon, growth 
hormone [GH], cortisol, and catecholamines). DKA can be 
considered to be present if (1) the arterial pH is below 7.3, (2) 
the serum bicarbonate level is below 15 mEq/L, and (3) ketones 
are elevated in serum or urine.
Pathophysiology
In the absence of adequate insulin secretion, persistent partial 
hepatic oxidation of fatty acids to ketone bodies occurs. Two 
of these three ketone bodies are organic acids and lead to 
metabolic acidosis with an elevated anion gap. Lactic acid may 
contribute to the acidosis when severe dehydration results in 
 Decision-Making Algorithms
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Abdominal Pain
Polyuria
Acidemia
Hypernatremia
Patients with DKA present initially with polyuria, polydipsia, 
nausea, and vomiting. Abdominal pain occurs frequently and 
can mimic an acute abdomen. The abdomen may be tender 
from vomiting or distended secondary to a paralytic ileus. The 
presence of polyuria, despite a state of clinical dehydration, 
indicates osmotic diuresis and differentiates patients with DKA 
from patients with gastroenteritis or other gastrointestinal 
disorders. Respiratory compensation for acidosis results in 
tachypnea with deep (Küssmaul) respirations. The fruity odor 
of acetone frequently can be detected on the patient’s breath. 
An altered mental status can occur, ranging from disorientation 
to coma.
Laboratory studies reveal hyperglycemia (serum glucose 
concentrations ranging from 200 mg/dL to >1,000 mg/
dL). Arterial pH is below 7.30, and the serum bicarbonate 
concentration is less than 15 mEq/L. Serum sodium con-
centrations may be elevated, normal, or low, depending on 
the balance of sodium and free water losses. The measured 
serum sodium concentration is artificially low, however, 
because of hyperglycemia. Hyperlipidemia also contributes to 
the decrease in measured serum sodium. The level of blood 
urea nitrogen (BUN) can be elevated with prerenal azotemia 
secondary to dehydration. The white blood cell count is usually 
elevated and can be left-shifted without implying the presence 
of infection. Fever is unusual and should prompt a search 
for infectious sources that may have triggered the episode 
of DKA.


--- PAGE 663 ---
642
SECTION 23  Endocrinology
Hyperglycemia
Fast-acting soluble insulin should be administered as a continu-
ous IV infusion (0.1 U/kg/hr). Serum glucose concentrations 
should decrease at a rate no faster than 100 mg/dL/hr. When 
serum glucose concentrations decrease to less than 250-300 mg/
dL, glucose should be added to the IV fluids. If serum glucose 
concentrations decrease to less than 200 mg/dL before correction 
of acidosis, the glucose concentration of the IV fluids should 
be increased, but the insulin infusion should not be decreased 
by more than half, and it should never be discontinued before 
resolution of acidosis.
Acidosis
Insulin therapy decreases the production of free fatty acids and 
protein catabolism and enhances glucose usage in target tissues. 
These processes correct acidosis. Bicarbonate therapy should 
be avoided. Potential adverse effects of bicarbonate administra-
tion include paradoxical increases in central nervous system 
(CNS) acidosis caused by increased diffusion of carbon dioxide 
across the blood-brain barrier, potential tissue hypoxia caused 
by shifts in the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve, abrupt 
osmotic changes, and increased risk of the development of 
cerebral edema.
As acidosis is corrected, urine ketone concentrations may 
appear to rise. β-Hydroxybutyrate, which is not detected in 
urine ketone assays, is converted with treatment to what the 
assay most detects, acetoacetate. Hence minute-to-minute urine 
ketone concentrations are not a required index of the adequacy 
of therapy.
Electrolyte Imbalances
Regardless of the serum potassium concentration at presentation, 
total body potassium depletion is likely. Serum potassium 
concentrations can decrease rapidly as insulin and then glucose 
therapy improves acidosis, and potassium is exchanged for 
intracellular hydrogen ions. When adequate urine output is 
Treatment
INADEQUATE INSULIN SECRETION
Fatty acid oxidation
Gluconeogenesis
Glycogenolysis
KETONE BODIES
HYPERGLYCEMIA
ACIDOSIS
Osmotic diuresis
DEHYDRATION
Renal
sodium loss
Peripheral glucose
uptake and
metabolism
Vomiting
Hyperkalemia
Renal
potassium
loss
Renal
phosphate
loss
Increased
insensible fluid
losses
Increased lactate
Poor tissue perfusion
FIGURE 171.2  Pathophysiology of diabetic ketoacidosis. 
 Decision-Making Algorithms
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Altered Mental Status
Acidemia
Hypokalemia
Therapy for patients with DKA involves careful replacement 
of fluid deficits, correction of acidosis and hyperglycemia via 
insulin administration, correction of electrolyte imbalances, 
and monitoring for complications of treatment. The optimal 
approach to management of DKA must strike a balance between 
adequate correction of fluid losses and avoidance of rapid shifts 
in osmolality and fluid balance. The most serious complication 
of DKA and its treatment is cerebral edema and cerebral 
herniation.
A patient with severe DKA is assumed to be approximately 
10% dehydrated. If a recent weight measurement is available, 
the precise extent of dehydration can be calculated. An initial 
intravenous (IV) fluid bolus of a glucose-free isotonic solution 
(normal saline, lactated Ringer solution) at 10-20 mL/kg should 
be given to restore intravascular volume and renal perfusion. 
The remaining fluid deficit after the initial bolus should be 
added to maintenance fluid requirements, and the total should 
be replaced slowly over 36-48 hours. Ongoing losses resulting 
from osmotic diuresis usually do not need to be replaced unless 
urine output is large or signs of poor perfusion are present. 
Osmotic diuresis is usually minimal when the serum glucose 
concentration decreases to less than 300 mg/dL. To avoid rapid 
shifts in serum osmolality, 0.9% sodium chloride can be used 
as the replacement fluid for the initial 4-6 hours, followed by 
0.45% sodium chloride.


--- PAGE 664 ---
643
CHAPTER 171  Diabetes Mellitus
adjustment of the insulin dose should be made over the following 
2-3 days. A patient already diagnosed with T1D may be restarted 
on the prior doses if they were adequate. For a patient with 
new-onset T1D, typical starting total daily doses are approxi-
mately 0.5-0.7 U/kg/24 hr for prepubertal patients and 
approximately 0.7-1 U/kg/24 hr for adolescents, using any 
number of the available insulin combinations. The best and 
most common choice for making the transition to SC insulin 
is to begin by giving injections of fast-acting (bolus) insulin 
(lispro, aspart, or glulisine insulin) with each meal and long-
acting (basal) insulin (glargine or detemir) at bedtime. This 
regimen of multiple daily injections provides the most flexibility 
but requires the patient to administer many injections per day 
and to count carbohydrates in food. An alternative is a fixed 
mixed split dosing regimen (neutral protamine Hagedorn [NPH] 
and fasting-acting insulin) with two daily injections.
Externally worn pumps that provide a continuous SC infusion 
of fast-acting insulin are available, although not usually used 
at the very onset of T1D. Insulin pumps provide fast-acting 
insulin in small basal amounts continuously every hour and 
will provide bolus insulin when instructed. Insulin pumps may 
be used by all age groups who are highly motivated to achieve 
tight control. The absence of SC depot insulin (glargine or 
detemir) can increase the risk of DKA.
Serum glucose concentrations should be assessed before each 
meal, at bedtime, and periodically at 2-3 A.M. to provide informa-
tion for adjustment of the regimen. Patients and their families 
should begin learning the principles of diabetes care as soon 
as possible. Demonstration of the ability to administer insulin 
injections and test glucose concentrations using a glucose meter 
is necessary before discharge, as is knowledge of hypoglycemia 
management. Meal planning is crucial to control glucose in 
T1D. Nutrition services must be part of the care delivered to 
the families from diagnosis.
Honeymoon Period
In some patients with new onset of T1D, the β cell mass has 
not been completely destroyed. The remaining functional β 
cells seem to recover function with insulin treatment. When 
this occurs, exogenous insulin requirements decrease. This is 
a period of stable blood glucose control, often with nearly 
normal glucose concentrations. This phase of the disease, known 
as the honeymoon period, usually starts in the first weeks 
of therapy, often continues for 3-6 months, and can last 
2 years.
Outpatient Type 1 Diabetes  
Mellitus Management
Management of T1D in children requires a comprehensive 
approach with attention to medical, nutritional, and psychosocial 
issues. Therapeutic strategies should be flexible with the 
individual needs of each patient and the family taken into 
account. Optimal care involves a team of diabetes professionals, 
including a physician, a diabetes nurse educator, a dietitian, 
and a social worker or psychologist.
Goals
The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial established that 
intensive insulin therapy, with the goal of maintaining blood 
shown, potassium should be added to the IV fluids. Potassium 
replacement should be given as 50% potassium chloride and 
50% potassium phosphate at a concentration of 20-40 mEq/L. 
This combination provides phosphate for replacement of deficits, 
but avoids excess phosphate administration, which may pre-
cipitate hypocalcemia. If the serum potassium level is greater 
than 6 mEq/L, potassium should not be added to IV fluids 
until the potassium level decreases.
Monitoring
Initial laboratory measurements should include serum glucose, 
sodium, potassium, chloride, bicarbonate, BUN, creatinine, 
calcium, phosphate, and magnesium concentrations; arterial 
or venous pH; and a urinalysis. Serum glucose measurement 
should be repeated every hour during therapy; electrolyte 
concentrations should be repeated every 2-3 hours. Calcium, 
phosphate, and magnesium concentrations should be measured 
every 4-6 hours during therapy. Neurological and mental status 
should be assessed at frequent intervals. Any complaints of 
headache or deterioration of mental status should prompt rapid 
evaluation for possible cerebral edema. Indicative symptoms 
include a decreased sensorium, sudden severe headache, vomit-
ing, change in vital signs (bradycardia, hypertension, apnea), 
a dilated pupil, ophthalmoplegia, or seizure.
Complications
Clinically apparent cerebral edema occurs in 1-5% of cases of 
DKA. Cerebral edema is the most serious complication of DKA, 
with a mortality rate of 20-80%. The pathogenesis of cerebral 
edema likely involves osmolar shift resulting in fluid accumula-
tion in the intracellular compartment and cell swelling. Subclini-
cal cerebral edema is common in patients with DKA, but the 
factors that exacerbate this process leading to symptomatic 
brain swelling and possible cerebral herniation are not clearly 
defined. Cerebral edema typically occurs 6-12 hours after therapy 
for DKA is begun, often following a period of apparent clinical 
improvement. Factors that correlate with increased risk for 
cerebral edema include higher initial BUN concentration, lower 
initial PCO2, failure of the serum sodium concentration to 
increase as glucose concentration decreases during treatment, 
and treatment with bicarbonate.
Signs of advanced cerebral edema include obtundation, 
papilledema, pupillary dilation or inequality, hypertension, 
bradycardia, and apnea. Treatment involves the rapid use of 
IV mannitol, endotracheal intubation, and ventilation and 
may require the use of a subdural bolt. Other complications 
of DKA are intracranial thrombosis or infarction, acute kidney 
injury with acute renal failure caused by severe dehydration, 
pancreatitis, arrhythmias caused by electrolyte abnormalities, 
pulmonary edema, and bowel ischemia. Peripheral edema 
occurs commonly 24-48 hours after therapy is initiated and 
may be related to residual elevations in antidiuretic hormone 
and aldosterone.
Transition to Outpatient Management
When the acidosis has been corrected and the patient tolerates 
oral feedings, the IV insulin infusion can be discontinued and 
a regimen of subcutaneous (SC) insulin injections can be initi-
ated. The first SC insulin dose should be given 30-45 minutes 
before discontinuation of the IV insulin infusion. Further 


--- PAGE 665 ---
644
SECTION 23  Endocrinology
children and adolescents who are highly motivated to achieve 
tight control.
Lispro, aspart, and glulisine insulin are synthetic human 
insulin analogs in which amino acid alterations result in fast 
absorption and onset of action (see Table 171.2). Because of the 
short duration of action, these are used in combination with 
long-acting insulin. Glargine and detemir are insulin analogs 
with increased solubility at acidic pH and decreased solubility 
at physiological pH. They have a duration of greater than 24 
hours and act as a basal insulin.
Newly diagnosed patients in the honeymoon period may 
require 0.4-0.6 U/kg/24 hr. Prepubertal patients with diabetes 
longer than 1-2 years typically require 0.5-1 U/kg/24 hr. During 
middle adolescence when elevated GH concentrations produce 
relative insulin resistance, insulin requirements increase by 
40-50%, and doses of 1-2 U/kg/24 hr are typical.
Nutrition
Balancing the daily meal plan with the dosages of insulin is 
crucial for maintaining serum glucose concentrations within 
the target range and avoiding hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia. 
The content and schedule of meals vary according to the type 
of insulin regimen used. It is recommended that carbohydrates 
contribute 50-65% of the total calories, protein 12-20%, and 
fat <30%. Saturated fat should contribute <10% of the total 
caloric intake, and cholesterol intake should be less than 
300 mg/24 hr. High-fiber content is recommended.
Patients using multiple daily injections or the insulin pump 
can maintain a more flexible meal schedule with regard to 
the timing of meals and the carbohydrate content. These 
patients give an injection of insulin before or immediately 
after each meal with the total dose calculated according to 
the carbohydrate content of the meal. Further adjustments in 
the dose can be made based on the measured serum glucose 
concentration and plans for activity during the day. Children 
using a twice-a-day combination of intermediate-acting and 
fast-acting insulins need to maintain a relatively consistent meal 
schedule so that carbohydrate absorption and insulin action 
peaks correspond. A typical meal schedule for a patient using 
this type of regimen involves three meals and three snacks 
daily. The total carbohydrate content of the meals and snacks 
should be kept constant.
glucose concentrations as close to normal as possible, can delay 
the onset and slow the progression of complications of diabetes 
(retinopathy, nephropathy, neuropathy). Attaining this goal 
using intensive insulin therapy can increase the risk of hypo-
glycemia. The adverse effects of hypoglycemia in young children 
may be significant because the immature CNS may be more 
susceptible to glycopenia. Although the risk for diabetic 
complications increases with duration of diabetes, there is 
controversy as to whether the increase of risk is slower in the 
prepubertal years than in adolescence and adulthood.
Given the benefits of stable, near normal blood glucose 
concentrations, a goal of HgbA1c <7.5% is set for children of 
all ages. Preprandial blood glucose target concentrations are 
90-130 mg/dL and concentrations before bedtime and overnight 
of 90-150 mg/dL. Goals of therapy need to take into account 
other individual characteristics, such as a past history of severe 
hypoglycemia and the abilities of the patient and family.
Insulin Regimens
Many types of insulin differ in duration of action and time to 
peak effect (Table 171.2). These insulins can be used in various 
combinations, depending on the needs and goals of the indi-
vidual patient. The most commonly used regimen is that of 
multiple injections of fast-acting insulin given with meals in 
combination with long-acting basal insulin given at bedtime. 
This regimen provides flexibility but requires administration 
of many injections per day and will require assistance for young 
children. After the total daily dose of insulin is determined, 
30-50% is given as long-acting insulin, and the remainder is 
given as fast-acting insulin, divided according to the need for 
corrections of high glucose levels and for meals. To correct for 
hyperglycemia, one can determine the insulin sensitivity using 
the 1,800/1,500 rule: dividing 1,800 (or 1,500) by the total daily 
dose of insulin to determine how many milligrams per deciliter 
of glucose will decrease with one unit of insulin. The 
insulin:carbohydrate ratio is used to calculate insulin for the 
carbohydrate content of food; 500 divided by the total daily 
dose determines the number of grams of carbohydrate that 
requires one unit of insulin.
Insulin pumps that provide a continuous SC infusion of 
short-acting insulin also are available and are being used by 
TABLE 171.2  Representative Profiles of Insulin
INSULIN
ONSET
PEAK ACTION
DURATION
VERY SHORT ACTING
Lispro, aspart, glulisine
5-15 min
30-90 min
3-5 hr
SHORT ACTING
Regular
30-60 min
2-3 hr
5-8 hr
INTERMEDIATE ACTING
Neutral protamine Hagedorn (NPH) (isophane)
2-4 hr
4-10 hr
10-16 hr
LONG ACTING
Glargine
2-4 hr
None
20-24 hr
Detemir
2-4 hr
6-14 hr
16-20 hr
Degludec
2-4 hr
None
24+ hr
Data from Wolfsdorf JI, ed. Intensive Diabetes Management. 4th ed. Alexandria, VA: American Diabetes Associations; 2009.


--- PAGE 666 ---
645
CHAPTER 171  Diabetes Mellitus
counter-regulatory responses also contribute to hypoglycemia. 
Abnormal glucagon responses to falling serum glucose con-
centrations develop within the first few years of the disease, 
and abnormalities in epinephrine release occur after a longer 
duration.
Lack of awareness of hypoglycemia occurs in approximately 
25% of patients with diabetes. Recent episodes of hypoglycemia 
may play a role in the pathophysiology of hypoglycemia unaware-
ness; after an episode of hypoglycemia, autonomic responses 
to subsequent episodes are reduced. A return of symptoms of 
hypoglycemia can be exhibited in these patients after 2-3 weeks 
of strict avoidance of hypoglycemic episodes.
Symptoms of hypoglycemia include symptoms resulting from 
neuroglycopenia (headache, visual changes, confusion, irritabil-
ity, or seizures) and symptoms resulting from the catecholamine 
response (tremors, tachycardia, diaphoresis, or anxiety). Mild 
episodes can be treated with administration of rapidly absorbed 
oral glucose (glucose gel or tablets or fruit juices). More severe 
episodes that result in seizures or loss of consciousness at home 
should be treated with glucagon injections. IV glucose should 
be given in hospital settings.
Prognosis
Long-term complications of T1D include retinopathy, nephropa-
thy, neuropathy, and macrovascular disease. Evidence of organ 
damage caused by hyperglycemia is rare in patients with diabetes 
of less than 5-10 years’ duration; clinically apparent disease 
rarely occurs before 10-15 years’ duration. Diabetic retinopathy 
is the leading cause of blindness in the United States. Nephropa-
thy eventually occurs in 30-40% and accounts for approximately 
30% of all new adult cases of end-stage renal disease. Neuropathy 
occurs in 30-40% of postpubertal patients with T1D and leads 
to sensory, motor, or autonomic deficits. Macrovascular disease 
results in an increased risk of myocardial infarction and stroke 
among individuals with diabetes.
Intensive control of diabetes, using frequent blood glucose 
testing, continuous glucose monitoring, and multiple daily 
injections of insulin or an insulin pump, can reduce the devel-
opment or progression of diabetic complications, including 
a 76% reduction of risk for retinopathy, a 39% reduction in 
microalbuminuria, and a 60% reduction in clinical neuropathy. 
For pubertal and adult patients, the benefits of intensive therapy 
likely outweigh the increased risk for hypoglycemia. For younger 
patients, in whom the risks for hypoglycemia are greater and the 
benefits of tight glucose control may be lower, a less intensive 
regimen may be appropriate.
TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS
Pathophysiology
T2D can occur as the result of various pathophysiological 
processes; however, the most common form results from 
peripheral insulin resistance and compensatory hyperinsu-
linemia, followed by failure of the pancreas to maintain adequate 
insulin secretion (see Table 171.1).
Epidemiology
The prevalence of T2D in children is increasing in parallel with 
childhood obesity and is highest in children of ethnic groups 
with a high prevalence of T2D in adults, including Native 
Blood Glucose Testing
Blood glucose should be routinely monitored before each meal 
and at bedtime. Hypoglycemia during the night or excessive 
variability in the morning glucose concentrations should prompt 
additional testing at 2 or 3 A.M. to ensure that there is no 
consistent hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia. During periods of 
illness or when blood glucose concentrations are higher than 
300 mg/dL, urine ketones also should be tested. Continuous 
glucose monitors, which provide minute-to-minute blood 
glucose concentration information, can be useful in following 
trends of blood glucose concentrations, but should not be used 
in calculations of mealtime insulin doses.
Long-Term Glycemic Control
Measurements of glycohemoglobin or hemoglobin A1c 
(HgbA1c) reflect the average blood glucose concentration over 
the preceding 3 months and provide a means for assessing 
long-term glycemic control. HgbA1c should be measured four 
times a year, and the results should be used for counseling of 
patients. The American Diabetes Association has set HgbA1c 
targets for children at <7.5%. Measurements of HgbA1c are 
inaccurate in patients with hemoglobinopathies. Glycosylated 
albumin or fructosamine can be used in these cases.
Complications
Patients with T1D for more than 3-5 years should receive an 
annual ophthalmological examination for retinopathy. Urine 
should be collected annually for assessment of microalbuminuria, 
which suggests early renal dysfunction and indicates a high 
risk of progression to nephropathy. Treatment with angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibitors may halt the progression of 
microalbuminuria. In children with T1D, annual cholesterol 
measurements and periodic assessment of blood pressure are 
recommended. Early detection of hypertension and hypercho-
lesterolemia with appropriate intervention can help limit future 
risk of coronary disease.
Other Disorders
Chronic autoimmune lymphocytic thyroiditis is particularly 
common and can result in hypothyroidism. Because symptoms 
can be subtle, thyroid function tests should be performed 
annually. Other disorders that occur with increased frequency 
in children with T1D include celiac disease, immunoglobulin 
A deficiency, Addison disease, and peptic ulcer disease.
Special Problems: Hypoglycemia
Hypoglycemia occurs commonly in patients with T1D. 
For patients in adequate or better control, it is expected to 
occur on average once or twice a week. Severe episodes of 
hypoglycemia, resulting in seizures or coma or requiring assis-
tance from another person, occur in 10-25% of these patients 
per year.
Hypoglycemia in patients with T1D results from a relative 
excess of insulin in relation to the serum glucose concentration. 
This excess can be caused by alterations in the dose, timing, 
or absorption of insulin; alterations of carbohydrate intake; or 
changes in insulin sensitivity resulting from activity. Defective 


--- PAGE 667 ---
646
SECTION 23  Endocrinology
MATURITY-ONSET DIABETES  
OF YOUTH (MODY)
MODY comprises a group of dominantly inherited forms of 
relatively mild diabetes. Insulin resistance does not occur in 
these patients; instead, the primary abnormality is an insuf-
ficient insulin secretory response to glycemic stimulation. 
Treatment depends on the type and can include the use of 
sulfonylureas.
CHAPTER 172 
Hypoglycemia
Hypoglycemia in infancy and childhood can result from a large 
variety of hormonal and metabolic defects (Table 172.1). 
Hypoglycemia occurs most frequently in the early neonatal 
period, often as a result of transient neonatal hyperinsulinemia 
in infants of diabetic mothers or as a result of inadequate energy 
stores to meet the disproportionately large metabolic needs of 
premature or small for gestational age newborns. Hypoglycemia 
during the first few days of life in an otherwise normal newborn 
is less frequent and warrants concern (see Chapter 6). After 
the initial 2-3 days of life, hypoglycemia is far less common 
and is more frequently the result of endocrine or metabolic 
disorders (although sepsis must always be ruled out).
DEFINITION
Clinical hypoglycemia is defined as a plasma glucose (PG) 
concentration low enough to cause symptoms and/or signs of 
impaired brain function. Brain glucose utilization is reduced 
at a PG concentration of approximately 55-65 mg/dL. Auto-
nomic system (neurogenic) symptoms are perceived at a PG 
concentration <55 mg/dL. Cognitive function is impaired 
(neuroglycopenia) at a PG concentration <50 mg/dL (Table 
172.2).
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Americans, Hispanic Americans, and African Americans. 
Obesity, the metabolic syndrome, ethnicity, and a family history 
of T2D are risk factors. Autoantibodies to the pancreas are 
present among some clinically assumed to have T2D, compound-
ing the difficulty in differentiating T1D from T2D at the time 
of diagnosis.
Clinical Manifestations and  
Differential Diagnosis
Fasting and postprandial glucose levels for diagnosis of T2D 
are the same as those for T1D. The diagnosis of T2D may be 
suspected on the basis of polyuria and polydipsia in a back-
ground of the metabolic syndrome. Differentiating T2D from 
T1D in children on only clinical grounds can be challenging. 
The possibility of T2D should be considered in patients who 
are obese, have a strong family history of T2D, have other 
characteristics of the metabolic syndrome, or have absence of 
antibodies to β cell antigens at the time of diagnosis of diabetes. 
Acanthosis nigricans, a dermatological manifestation of 
hyperinsulinism and insulin resistance, presents as hyperkera-
totic pigmentation in the nape of the neck and in flexural areas 
and is noted as a sign in the metabolic syndrome. Although 
ketoacidosis occurs far more commonly in T1D, it also can 
occur in patients with T2D under conditions of physiological 
stress and cannot be used as an absolute differentiating factor. 
T2D can be confirmed by the evaluation of insulin or C-peptide 
responses to stimulation with oral carbohydrate and in the 
absence of islet cell autoreactivity.
Therapy
T2D is the result of a combination of insulin resistance, relative 
insulin deficiency, and a secretory β cell defect. Asymptomatic 
patients with mildly elevated glucose values (slightly >126 mg/
dL for fasting or slightly >200 mg/dL for random glucose) may 
be managed initially with lifestyle modifications, including 
nutrition therapy (dietary adjustments) and increased exercise. 
Exercise has been shown to decrease insulin resistance. In most 
children with new-onset, uncomplicated T2D, oral agents are 
usually the first line of therapy. Only metformin, an insulin 
secretagogue, is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Admin-
istration for use in children. A rare side effect of metformin is 
lactic acidosis, occurring mainly in patients with compromised 
renal function. The most common side effect is gastrointestinal 
upset. If ketonuria or ketoacidosis occurs, insulin treatment is 
necessary to first achieve adequate glycemic control, but may 
be discontinued within weeks with continuation of oral medica-
tions. Insulin therapy may be required if adequate glycemic 
control is not achieved with lifestyle modifications and 
metformin.
Because T2D may have a long preclinical course, early 
diagnosis is possible in subjects at risk who have the meta-
bolic syndrome. Significant lifestyle modifications, such as 
improved eating habits and increased exercise, have a role 
in preventing or decreasing the morbidity of T2D. Finally, it 
is critical to monitor and manage the other components of 
metabolic syndrome, such as advanced pubertal development, 
hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and polycystic ovary syndrome 
in females.
 Decision-Making Algorithms
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Hypotonia and Weakness
Altered Mental Status
Irritable Infant
The symptoms and signs of hypoglycemia result from direct 
depression of the central nervous system owing to lack of energy 
substrate and the counter-regulatory adrenergic response to 
low glucose via catecholamine secretion designed to correct 
hypoglycemia (see Table 172.2). Compared with older children, 
infants do not usually show adrenergic symptoms. The signs 
and symptoms of hypoglycemia in infants are relatively non-
specific and include jitteriness, feeding difficulties, pallor, 
hypotonia, hypothermia, episodes of apnea and bradycardia, 
depressed levels of consciousness, and seizures. In older children, 
signs and symptoms include confusion, irritability, headaches, 


--- PAGE 668 ---
647
CHAPTER 172  Hypoglycemia
and metabolic pathways (Fig. 172.1). In a normal individual, 
a decrease in serum glucose concentrations leads to a sup-
pression of insulin secretion and increased secretion of the 
counter-regulatory hormones (growth hormone [GH], cortisol, 
glucagon, and epinephrine; see Fig. 172.1). This hormonal signal 
promotes the release of amino acids (particularly alanine) from 
muscle to fuel gluconeogenesis and the release of triglyceride 
from adipose tissue stores to provide free fatty acids (FFAs) for 
hepatic ketogenesis. FFAs and ketones serve as alternate fuels 
for muscle. This hormonal signal also stimulates the breakdown 
of hepatic glycogen and promotes gluconeogenesis. Failure of 
any of the components of this hormonal signal can lead to 
hypoglycemia.
visual changes, tremors, pallor, sweating, tachycardia, weakness, 
seizures, and coma.
Failure to recognize and treat severe, prolonged hypoglycemia 
can result in serious long-term morbidity, including intellectual 
disability and nonhypoglycemic seizures. Younger infants and 
patients with more severe or prolonged hypoglycemia are at 
greatest risk for adverse outcomes.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Hormonal Signal
Normal regulation of serum glucose concentrations requires 
appropriate interaction of a number of hormonal signals 
TABLE 172.1  Classification of Hypoglycemia in Infants and Children
ABNORMALITIES IN THE HORMONAL SIGNAL INDICATING 
HYPOGLYCEMIA
Counter-Regulatory Hormone Deficiency
MPHD
Isolated growth hormone deficiency
ACTH deficiency
Addison disease
Glucagon deficiency
Epinephrine deficiency
Hyperinsulinism
Infant of a diabetic mother
Infant with erythroblastosis fetalis
β cell adenoma (insulinoma)
Congenital hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome
Anti-insulin receptor antibodies
Inadequate Substrate
Prematurity/small for gestational age infant
Ketotic hypoglycemia
Maple syrup urine disease
Disorders of Metabolic Response Pathways
Glycogenolysis
Glucose-6-phosphatase deficiency
Amylo-1,6-glucosidase deficiency
Liver glycogen phosphorylase deficiency
Glycogen synthase deficiency
Glycogen debranching enzyme deficiency
Phosphorylase kinase deficiency
GLUT2 transporter mutations
Gluconeogenesis
Fructose-1,6-diphosphatase deficiency
Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase deficiency
Fatty Acid Oxidation (incomplete list)
Long-, medium-, or short-chain fatty acid acyl-CoA 
dehydrogenase deficiency
Carnitine deficiency (primary or secondary)
Carnitine palmitoyltransferase deficiency
Other
Enzymatic defects
  Galactosemia
  Hereditary fructose intolerance
  Propionic acidemia
  Methylmalonic acidemia
  Tyrosinosis
  Glutaric aciduria
  Global hepatic dysfunction
Reye syndrome
Hepatitis
Heart failure
Sepsis, shock
Carcinoma/sarcoma (IGF-2 secretion)
Malnutrition/starvation
Hyperviscosity syndrome
Drugs/Intoxications
Oral hypoglycemic agents or insulin
Alcohol
Salicylates
Propranolol
Valproic acid
Pentamidine
Ackee fruit (unripe)
Quinine
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (with renal failure)
ACTH, Adrenocorticotropic hormone; acyl-CoA, acyl coenzyme A; IGF-2, insulin-like growth factor-2; MPHD, multiple pituitary hormone deficiency.


--- PAGE 669 ---
648
SECTION 23  Endocrinology
Hyperinsulinism that persists beyond a few days of age can 
result from distinct genetic disorders affecting glucose-regulated 
insulin release, or congenital hyperinsulinism. In these infants, 
hyperplasia of the pancreatic islet cells develops in the absence 
of excess stimulation by maternal diabetes. There are currently 
11 genes associated with monogenic forms of hyperinsulin-
ism (ABCC8, KCNJ11, GLUD1, GCK, HADH1, UCP2, MCT1, 
HNF4A, HNF1A, HK1, PGM1), as well as several syndromic 
genetic forms of HI (e.g., Beckwith-Wiedemann, Kabuki, and 
Turner syndromes). The most common causes for congenital 
hyperinsulinism involve inactivating KATP channel mutations 
and account for approximately 60% of all identifiable mutations. 
Hyperinsulinism also can occur in Beckwith-Wiedemann syn-
drome (a condition characterized by neonatal somatic gigantism, 
macrosomia, macroglossia, omphalocele, visceromegaly, and 
earlobe creases).
Regardless of the cause, neonates with hyperinsulinism are 
characteristically large for gestational age (see Chapter 60). 
Hypoglycemia is severe and frequently occurs within 1-3 hours 
of a feeding. Glucose requirements are increased, often two to 
three times the normal basal glucose requirement of 6-8 mg/kg/
min. The diagnosis of hyperinsulinism in children is determined 
by evaluating markers of inappropriate insulin effects (e.g., sup-
pressed ketogenesis) because plasma insulin concentrations are 
frequently not clearly elevated. Diagnosis is most reliably based 
on a closely monitored provocative fasting test that includes 
(1) frequent sampling of plasma concentrations of glucose, 
insulin, β-hydroxybutyrate, and FFAs and (2) terminating the 
test when glucose concentrations decline toward 50 mg/dL with a 
determination of the glycemic response to glucagon. The absence 
of serum and urine ketones at the time of hypoglycemia is an 
important diagnostic feature, distinguishing hyperinsulinism 
from defects in counter-regulatory hormone secretion.
Treatment initially involves the infusion of intravenous 
(IV) glucose at high rates and of diazoxide to suppress insulin 
secretion. If diazoxide therapy is unsuccessful, long-acting 
somatostatin analogs can be tried. Often medical therapy for 
persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of the newborn is 
unsuccessful, and subtotal (90%) pancreatectomy is required 
to prevent long-term neurological sequelae of hypoglycemia.
TABLE 172.2  Symptoms and Signs of Hypoglycemia
FEATURES ASSOCIATED 
WITH EPINEPHRINE 
RELEASE*
FEATURES ASSOCIATED 
WITH CEREBRAL 
GLYCOPENIA
Perspiration
Headache
Palpitation (tachycardia)
Mental confusion
Pallor
Somnolence
Paresthesia
Dysarthria
Trembling
Personality changes
Anxiety
Inability to concentrate
Weakness
Staring
Nausea
Hunger
Vomiting
Convulsions
Ataxia
Coma
Diplopia
Stroke
*These features and perceptions of the features may be blunted if the patient 
is receiving β-blocking agents.
Adipose tissue
EPI
GLUCAGON
TG
FFA
Glycerol
Gluconeogenesis
Glycogenolysis
EPI
GH
CORTISOL
GLUCAGON
Ketogenesis
Heart, kidney,
muscle, brain
Muscle
CORTISOL
Amino acids
(alanine)
Lactate
Insulin
–
–
Insulin
–
Insulin
–
Glucose
Brain,
blood cells
FIGURE 172.1  Regulation of serum glucose. –  represents inhibitions. EPI, Epinephrine; FFA, free 
fatty acid; GH, growth hormone; TG, triglyceride. 
 Decision-Making Algorithm
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Obesity
Hyperinsulinemia
A lack of suppression of insulin secretion in response to low 
serum glucose concentrations can occur in infants but is 
uncommon beyond the neonatal period. This situation arises 
most frequently in infants of diabetic mothers who were exposed 
to high concentrations of maternally derived glucose in utero, 
resulting in fetal islet cell hyperplasia. The hyperinsulinemic 
state is transient, usually lasting hours to days.


--- PAGE 670 ---
649
CHAPTER 172  Hypoglycemia
mobilization of alanine from muscle to fuel gluconeogenesis 
is thought to be the cause, although the condition may derive 
mostly from having lower fuel reserves. Because there are no 
specific diagnostic tests for this disorder, ketotic hypoglycemia 
is a diagnosis of exclusion.
Treatment involves avoidance of fasting and frequent feedings 
of a high-protein, high-carbohydrate diet. Patients may require 
hospitalization for IV glucose infusion if they cannot maintain 
adequate oral intake during a period of illness.
DISRUPTED METABOLIC  
RESPONSE PATHWAYS
Maintenance of normal serum glucose concentrations in the 
fasting state requires glucose production via glycogenolysis and 
gluconeogenesis and the production of alternative energy sources 
(FFAs and ketones) via lipolysis and fatty acid oxidation.
Glycogenolysis
Some glycogen storage diseases (GSDs) occur in a variety of 
subtypes that differ in severity (see Chapter 52). Among the 
subtypes that result in hypoglycemia, the most severe form is 
glucose-6-phosphatase deficiency, which is characterized by 
severe hypoglycemia, massive hepatomegaly, growth retardation, 
and lactic acidosis. In contrast, deficiencies in the glycogen 
phosphorylase enzymes may cause isolated hepatomegaly with 
or without hypoglycemia.
The diagnosis of GSD is suggested by a finding of hepato-
megaly without splenomegaly (although GSD type 0 is not 
associated with hepatomegaly). Confirmation of the diagnosis 
requires specific biochemical studies of leukocytes or liver 
biopsy specimens. Treatment for the most common types 
involves frequent high-carbohydrate feedings during the day 
and continuous feedings at night via nasogastric tube. Feedings 
of uncooked cornstarch overnight are sufficient to maintain 
serum glucose concentrations in some patients.
Gluconeogenesis
Defects in gluconeogenesis are uncommon and include fructose-
1,6-diphosphatase deficiency and phosphoenolpyruvate car-
boxykinase deficiency. Affected patients exhibit fasting 
hypoglycemia, hepatomegaly, lactic acidosis, and hyperuricemia. 
Ketosis occurs, and FFA and alanine concentrations are high. 
Treatment involves frequent high-carbohydrate, low-protein 
feedings (see Chapter 52).
Fatty Acid Oxidation
Fatty acid oxidation disorders of ketogenesis include the fatty 
acid acyl-coenzyme A (CoA) dehydrogenase deficiencies; 
long-chain, medium-chain, and short-chain acyl-CoA dehy-
drogenase deficiencies; and hereditary carnitine deficiency (see 
Chapter 55). Of these disorders, medium-chain acyl-CoA 
dehydrogenase deficiency is the most common; it occurs in 1 
in 4,000-17,000 live births, depending on the population. Patients 
often are well in infancy and have the first episode of hypo-
glycemia at 2 years of age or older. Mild hepatomegaly may be 
present along with mild hyperammonemia, hyperuricemia, and 
mild elevations in hepatic transaminases. Episodes of nonketotic 
hypoglycemia usually occur with prolonged fasting or during 
Factitious Hyperinsulinemia
In rare cases, insulin or a hypoglycemic medication is admin-
istered by a parent or caregiver to a child as a form of child 
abuse, which is a condition referred to as Munchausen syndrome 
by proxy. This diagnosis should be suspected if extremely high 
insulin concentrations are detected (>100 µU/mL). C-peptide 
concentrations are low or undetectable, which confirms that 
the insulin is from an exogenous source.
Defects in Counter-Regulatory Hormones
Abnormalities in the secretion of counter-regulatory hormones 
that produce hypoglycemia usually involve GH, cortisol, or 
both. Deficiencies in glucagon and epinephrine secretion are 
rare. GH and cortisol deficiency occur as a result of hypopi-
tuitarism. Hypopituitarism results from congenital hypoplasia 
or aplasia of the pituitary or, more commonly, from deficiency 
of hypothalamic releasing factors (see Chapter 173). Clues to 
this diagnosis in infants include the presence of hypoglycemia 
in association with midline facial or neurological defects (e.g., 
cleft lip and palate or absence of the corpus callosum), pendular 
(roving) nystagmus (indicating visual impairment from possible 
abnormalities in the development of the optic nerves, which 
can occur in optic nerve hypoplasia), and the presence of 
microphallus and cryptorchidism in boys (indicating abnormali-
ties in gonadotropin secretion). Jaundice and hepatomegaly 
also can occur, simulating neonatal hepatitis. Despite the 
presence of GH deficiency, these infants are usually of normal 
size at birth.
Deficient cortisol secretion also can occur in primary adrenal 
insufficiency, resulting from a variety of causes. In infants it often 
results from congenital adrenal hyperplasia, most frequently 
as a result of 21-hydroxylase deficiency (see Chapters 177 and 
178). In older children, primary adrenal insufficiency is seen 
most frequently in Addison disease and other disorders (see 
Chapter 178).
Confirmation of GH or cortisol deficiency as the cause of 
hypoglycemia requires the detection of low serum GH and 
cortisol concentrations during an episode of hypoglycemia or 
after other stimulatory testing. In contrast to hyperinsulinism, 
serum and urine ketones are positive at the time of hypoglycemia 
and FFAs are elevated. Treatment involves supplementation of 
the deficient hormones in physiological doses.
ENERGY STORES
Sufficient energy stores in the form of glycogen, adipose tissue, 
and muscle are necessary to respond appropriately to hypo-
glycemia. Deficiencies in these stores are a common cause of 
hypoglycemia in neonates who are small for gestational age or 
premature (see Chapter 60). Beyond the early neonatal period, 
energy stores are usually sufficient to meet the metabolic 
requirements except in malnourished children.
IDIOPATHIC KETOTIC HYPOGLYCEMIA
A common cause of new-onset hypoglycemia is idiopathic 
ketotic hypoglycemia, usually seen in children between 18 
months and remits by 8 years of age. Patients have symptoms 
of hypoglycemia after a period of prolonged fasting, often in 
the setting of an intercurrent illness with decreased feeding. 
Children with this disorder are often thin and small and may 
have a history of being small for gestational age. Defective 


--- PAGE 671 ---
650
SECTION 23  Endocrinology
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Acute care of a patient with hypoglycemia consists of rapid 
administration of IV glucose (2 mL/kg of 10% dextrose 
in water). After the initial bolus, an infusion of IV glucose 
should provide approximately 1.5 times the normal hepatic 
glucose production rate (8-12 mg/kg/min in infants, 6-8 mg/
kg/min in children). This infusion allows for suppression of 
the catabolic state and prevents further decompensation in 
patients with certain metabolic disorders. If adrenal insuffi-
ciency is suspected, stress doses of glucocorticoids should be 
administered.
CHAPTER 173 
Short Stature
GROWTH
Normal growth is the final common pathway of many factors, 
including endocrine, environmental, nutritional, and genetic 
influences (see Chapter 5). A normal linear growth pattern is 
good evidence of overall health and can be considered a bioassay 
for the well-being of the whole child. The effects of certain 
hormones on growth and ultimate height are listed in Table 
173.1. Just as various factors influence stature, stature itself 
influences psychological, social, and potentially economic 
well-being. Parental concern about the psychosocial conse-
quences of abnormal stature often causes a family to seek medical 
attention.
Growth Hormone Physiology
Growth hormone (GH) secretion is pulsatile, stimulated by 
hypothalamic GH-releasing factor (GRF), and inhibited by GH 
release inhibitory factor (somatostatin, somatotropin release-
inhibiting factor [SRIF]), which interact with their individual 
receptors on the pituitary somatotrope in a noncompetitive 
manner. GH is also stimulated by a number of factors (e.g., 
ghrelin, sex steroid hormones, clonidine, hypoglycemia, 
episodes of intercurrent illness. Treatment involves avoidance 
of fasting.
OTHER METABOLIC DISORDERS
Many metabolic disorders can lead to hypoglycemia, including 
galactosemia, hereditary fructose intolerance, and disorders of 
organic acid metabolism (see Table 172.1). Hypoglycemia in 
these disorders is usually a reflection of global hepatic dysfunc-
tion secondary to the buildup of hepatotoxic intermediates. 
Many of these disorders present with low concentrations of 
ketone bodies because ketogenesis also is affected. The finding 
of non-glucose-reducing substances in the urine after ingestion 
of offending substances suggests a diagnosis of galactosemia 
or hereditary fructose intolerance. Treatment requires dietary 
restriction of the specific offending substances.
MEDICATIONS AND INTOXICATION
Hypoglycemia can occur as an adverse effect of numerous 
medications (see Table 172.1). Ethanol ingestion also can cause 
hypoglycemia, especially in younger children, because the 
metabolism of ethanol results in the depletion of cofactors 
necessary for gluconeogenesis.
DIAGNOSIS
Although the list of causes of hypoglycemia is long and 
complex, establishing the etiology in a particular patient 
is important. Frequently it is difficult to make an accurate 
diagnosis until one can obtain a critical sample of blood and 
urine at the time of the hypoglycemic episode. In a child 
with unexplained hypoglycemia, a serum sample should be 
obtained before treatment for the measurement of glucose 
and insulin, GH, cortisol, FFAs, and β-hydroxybutyrate and 
acetoacetate. Measurement of serum lactate levels also should be 
considered. A urine specimen should be obtained for measur-
ing ketones and reducing substances. Hypoglycemia without 
ketonuria suggests hyperinsulinism or a defect in fatty acid 
oxidation. The results of this initial testing can establish whether 
endocrine causes are responsible and, if not, provide initial 
information regarding which types of metabolic disorders are 
most likely.
TABLE 173.1  Hormonal Effects on Growth
HORMONE
BONE AGE
GROWTH RATE
ADULT HEIGHT*
Androgen excess
Advanced
Increased
Diminished
Androgen deficiency
Normal or delayed
Normal or decreased
Increased slightly or normal
Thyroxine excess
Advanced
Increased
Normal or diminished
Thyroxine deficiency
Retarded
Decreased
Diminished
Growth hormone excess
Normal or advanced
Increased
Excessive
Growth hormone deficiency
Retarded
Decreased
Diminished
Cortisol excess
Retarded
Decreased
Diminished
Cortisol deficiency
Normal
Normal
Normal
*Effect in most patients with treatment.
Modified from Underwood LE, Van Wyk JJ. Normal and aberrant growth. In: Wilson JD, Foster DW, eds. Textbook of Endocrinology. 8th ed. Philadelphia: WB 
Saunders; 1992.


--- PAGE 672 ---
651
CHAPTER 173  Short Stature
Endocrine Evaluation of Growth  
Hormone Secretion
etc.). GH circulates bound to a GH-binding protein (GHBP); 
GHBP abundance reflects the abundance of GH receptors. 
GH has direct effects on tissue and also causes production 
and secretion of insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) in many 
tissues. GH stimulates IGF-1 production in the liver along 
with production of the acid-labile subunit and the IGF-binding 
protein (IGF-BP3); this forms the complex that delivers IGF-1 
to tissue.
IGF-1 acts primarily as a paracrine and autocrine agent 
and is most closely associated with postnatal growth. When 
IGF-1 attaches to its membrane-bound receptor, second mes-
sengers are stimulated to change the physiology of the cell 
and produce growth effects. IGF-1 production is influenced 
by disease states such as malnutrition, chronic renal and liver 
disease, hypothyroidism, or obesity.
IGF-BP3 is measurable in clinical assays and is less influenced 
by nutrition and age than is IGF-1; measuring IGF-1 and 
IGF-BP3 is useful in evaluating GH adequacy, particularly in 
infancy and early childhood.
Measurement of Growth
The correct measurement of an infant’s length requires one 
adult to hold the infant’s head still and another adult to extend 
the feet with the soles perpendicular to the lower legs. A 
caliper-like device, such as an infantometer, or the movable 
plates on an infant scale are used so that the exact distance 
between the two calipers or plates can be determined. Marking 
the position of the head and feet of an infant lying on a sheet 
of paper on the examining table leads to inaccuracies and may 
miss true disorders of growth or create false concerns about a 
disorder of growth in a normal child. Accurate measurements 
of height (standing), or length (lying down), and weight should 
be plotted on the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
growth charts for the timely diagnosis of growth disorders 
(http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts/).
After 2 years of age, the height of a child should be measured 
in the standing position. Children measured in the standing 
position should be barefoot against a hard surface. A Harpenden 
stadiometer or equivalent device is optimal for the measurement 
of stature. A decrease of roughly 1.25 cm in height measurement 
may occur when the child is measured in the standing position 
rather than in the lying position, leading to the inappropriate 
referral of many children who appear to be not growing to a 
subspecialist.
Measurement of the arm span is essential when the diagnoses 
of Marfan or Klinefelter syndrome, short-limbed dwarfism, 
or other dysmorphic conditions are considered. Arm span is 
measured as the distance between the tips of the fingers when the 
patient holds both arms outstretched horizontally while standing 
against a solid surface. The upper-to-lower segment ratio is 
the ratio of the upper segment (determined by subtraction 
of the measurement from the symphysis pubis to the floor 
[known as the lower segment] from the total height) to the 
lower segment. This ratio changes with age. A normal term 
infant has an upper-to-lower ratio of 1.7 : 1, a 1-year-old has 
a ratio of 1.4 : 1, and a 10-year-old has a ratio of 1 : 1. Condi-
tions of hypogonadism, not commonly discerned or suspected 
until after the normal age for onset of puberty, lead to greatly 
decreased upper-to-lower ratio in an adult, whereas long-lasting 
and untreated hypothyroidism leads to a high upper-to-lower 
ratio in the child.
 Decision-Making Algorithm
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Short Stature
 Decision-Making Algorithm
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Short Stature
GH is a 191–amino acid protein secreted by the pituitary gland 
under the control of GRF and SRIF (see Fig. 170.2). GH secretion 
is enhanced by α-adrenergic stimulation, hypoglycemia, starva-
tion, exercise, early stages of sleep, and stress and inhibited by 
β-adrenergic stimulation and hyperglycemia. Because concentra-
tions of GH are low throughout the day, except for brief secretory 
peaks in the middle of the night or early morning, the daytime 
ascertainment of GH deficiency or sufficiency on the basis of 
a single determination of a random GH concentration is impos-
sible. Adequacy of GH secretion may be determined by a 
stimulation test to measure peak GH secretion. A normal 
response is a vigorous secretory peak after stimulation; the lack 
of such a peak is consistent with GH deficiency. However, there 
is a high false-positive rate (on any day, about 10% or more of 
normal children may not reach the normal GH peak after even 
two stimulatory tests). Indirect measurements of GH secretion, 
such as serum concentrations of IGF-1 and IGF-BP3, are 
considered better screens for GH deficiency.
The factors responsible for postnatal growth are not the same 
as the factors that mediate fetal growth. Thyroid hormone 
is essential for normal postnatal growth, although a thyroid 
hormone-deficient fetus achieves a normal birth length; similarly, 
a GH-deficient fetus has a normal birth length, although in IGF-1 
deficiency resulting from GH resistance (Laron dwarfism), 
fetuses are shorter than control subjects. Adequate thyroid 
hormone is necessary to allow the secretion of GH. Hypothyroid 
patients may appear falsely to be GH deficient; with thyroid 
hormone repletion, GH secretion normalizes. Gonadal steroids 
are important in the pubertal growth spurt. The effects of other 
hormones on growth are noted in Table 173.1.
ABNORMALITIES OF GROWTH
Short Stature of Nonendocrine Causes
Short stature is defined as subnormal height relative to other 
children of the same gender and age, taking family heights into 
consideration. It can be caused by numerous conditions (Table 
173.2). The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention growth 
charts use the 3rd percentile of the growth curve as the demarca-
tion of the lower limit. Growth failure denotes a slow growth 
rate regardless of stature. Ultimately a slow growth rate leads 
to short stature, but a disease process is detected sooner if the 
decreased growth rate is noted before the stature becomes short. 
Plotted on a growth chart, growth failure appears as a curve 
that crosses percentiles downward and is associated with a 
height velocity below the 5th percentile of height velocity for 

