
--- PAGE 515 ---
494
SECTION 17  Digestive System
α1-Antitrypsin deficiency presents with clinical find-
ings indistinguishable from neonatal hepatitis. Only about 
10-20% of all infants with the genetic defect exhibit neonatal 
cholestasis. Of these affected infants, about 20-30% develop 
chronic liver disease, which may result in cirrhosis and liver 
failure. Life-threatening α1-antitrypsin deficiency occurs 
in only 3-5% of affected pediatric patients. α1-Antitrypsin 
deficiency is the leading metabolic disorder requiring liver 
transplantation.
Alagille syndrome is characterized by chronic cholestasis 
with the unique liver biopsy finding of paucity of bile ducts in 
the portal triads. Associated abnormalities in some (syndromic) 
types include peripheral pulmonic stenosis or other cardiac 
anomalies; hypertelorism; unusual facies with deep-set eyes, 
prominent forehead, and a pointed chin; butterfly vertebrae; 
and a defect of the ocular limbus (posterior embryotoxon). 
Cholestasis is variable but is usually lifelong and associated 
with hypercholesterolemia and severe pruritus. Progression 
to end-stage liver disease is uncommon. Liver transplanta-
tion sometimes is performed electively to relieve severe and 
uncontrollable pruritus.
Laboratory and Imaging Studies
The laboratory approach to diagnosis of a neonate with cho-
lestatic jaundice is presented in Table 130.2. Noninvasive studies 
may aid a rapid diagnosis. Early imaging studies are performed 
to evaluate for biliary obstruction and other anatomical lesions 
that may be surgically treatable. When necessary to rule out 
biliary atresia or to obtain prognostic information, liver biopsy 
is a final option (Fig. 130.2).
Treatment
Treatment of extrahepatic biliary atresia is the surgical Kasai 
procedure, in which the fibrotic extrahepatic bile duct remnant 
is removed and replaced with a roux-en-Y loop of jejunum. 
This operation must be performed before 3 months of age 
to have the best chance of success. Even so, the success rate 
is low; many children require liver transplantation. Some 
metabolic causes of neonatal cholestasis are treatable by dietary 
manipulation (galactosemia) or medication (tyrosinemia); all 
affected patients require supportive care. This includes fat-
soluble vitamin supplements (vitamins A, D, E, and K) and 
formula containing medium-chain triglycerides, which can be 
absorbed without bile salt–induced micelles. Choleretic agents, 
such as ursodeoxycholic acid, may improve bile flow in some 
conditions.
VIRAL HEPATITIS
See Chapter 113.
FULMINANT LIVER FAILURE
Etiology and Epidemiology
Fulminant liver failure is defined as severe liver disease 
with onset of hepatic encephalopathy within 8 weeks after 
initial symptoms, in the absence of chronic liver disease. 
Etiology includes viral hepatitis, metabolic disorders, 
autoimmune hepatitis, ischemia, neoplastic disease, and toxins 
(Table 130.3).
Treatment
Treatment of appendicitis is usually surgical. Laparoscopic 
appendectomy is curative if performed before perforation. With 
perforation, a course of postoperative IV antibiotics is required. 
Broad-spectrum coverage is necessary to cover the mixed bowel 
flora. In low-risk patients with nonperforated appendicitis, some 
centers have a nonsurgical approach and use high dose broad-
spectrum intravenous antibiotics in a hospital setting.
CHAPTER 130 
Liver Disease
CHOLESTASIS
Etiology and Epidemiology
Cholestasis is defined as reduced bile flow and is characterized 
by elevation of the conjugated, or direct, bilirubin fraction. 
This condition must be distinguished from physiological 
neonatal jaundice, in which the direct bilirubin is never elevated 
(see Chapter 62). Neonatal jaundice that is secondary to 
unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia is the result of immature 
hepatocellular excretory function or hemolysis, which increases 
the production of bilirubin. When direct bilirubin is elevated, 
many potentially serious disorders must be considered (Fig. 
130.1, Table 130.1). Emphasis must be placed on the rapid 
diagnosis of treatable and potentially imminently lethal disor-
ders, especially biliary atresia and metabolic disorders, such 
as galactosemia or tyrosinemia.
Clinical Manifestations
 Decision-Making Algorithm
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Jaundice
The jaundice of extrahepatic biliary atresia (biliary atresia) 
usually is not evident immediately at birth, but develops in the 
first week or two of life. The reason is that extrahepatic bile 
ducts are usually present at birth but are then destroyed by an 
idiopathic inflammatory process. Aside from jaundice, these 
infants do not initially appear ill. The liver injury progresses 
rapidly to cirrhosis; symptoms of portal hypertension with 
splenomegaly, ascites, muscle wasting, and poor weight gain 
are evident by a few months of age. If surgical drainage is not 
performed successfully early in the course (ideally by 2 months), 
progression to liver failure is inevitable.
Neonatal hepatitis is characterized by an ill-appearing 
infant with an enlarged liver and jaundice. There is no specific 
diagnostic test. If liver biopsy is performed, the presence of 
hepatocyte giant cells is characteristic. Cytomegalovirus, herpes 
simplex virus, and syphilis must be ruled out. Hepatobiliary 
scintigraphy typically shows slow hepatic uptake with eventual 
excretion of isotope into the intestine. These infants have a 
good prognosis overall, with spontaneous resolution occurring 
in most.

