
--- PAGE 525 ---
504
SECTION 17  Digestive System
peptic disease, or any other condition predisposing to intestinal 
perforation, specific testing should be performed.
TREATMENT
Peritonitis caused by an intraabdominal surgical process, such 
as appendicitis or a penetrating wound, must be managed 
surgically. Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis should be treated 
with a broad-spectrum antibiotic with good coverage of resistant 
pneumococcus and enteric bacteria. Cefotaxime is generally 
effective as initial therapy while awaiting culture and sensitivity 
results. Anaerobic coverage with metronidazole should be added 
whenever a perforated viscus is suspected.
Suggested Readings
Belsha D, Bremner R, Thomson M. Indications for gastrointestinal 
endoscopy in childhood. Arch Dis Child. 2016;101(12):1153–1160.
Brown LK, Beattie RM, Tighe MP. Practical management of functional 
abdominal pain in children. Arch Dis Child. 2015;101(7):677–683.
Clark MB, Slayton RL, Segura A, et al. Fluoride use in caries prevention in 
the primary care setting. Pediatrics. 2014;134(3):626–633.
Davies I, Burman-Roy S, Murphy MS, et al. Gastro-oesophageal reflux 
disease in children. BMJ. 2015;350:g7703.
Ediger TR, Hill ID. Celiac disease. Pediatr Rev. 2014;35(10):409–415. 
PMID:25274968.
Fell JM, Muhammed R, Spray C, et al. Management of ulcerative colitis. 
Arch Dis Child. 2016;101(5):469–474. PMID:26553909.
Gailey DG. Feeding infants with cleft and the postoperative cleft 
management. Oral Maxillofac Surg Clin North Am. 2016;28(2):153–159.
Gottesman LE, Del Vecchio MT, Aronoff SC. Etiologies of conjugated 
hyperbilirubinemia in infancy: a systematic review of 1692 subjects. 
BMC Pediatr. 2015;15:192.
Horslen S. Acute liver failure and transplantation in children. S Afr Med J. 
2014;104(11 Pt 2):808–812.
Kammermeier J, Morris MA, Garrick V, et al. Management of Crohn’s 
disease. Arch Dis Child. 2016;101(5):475–480. PMID:26553907.
Khalaf R, Phen C, Karjoo S, et al. Cholestasis beyond the neonatal and 
infancy periods. Pediatr Gastroenterol Hepatol Nutr. 2016;19(1):1–11.
Kim JS. Acute abdominal pain in children. Pediatr Gastroenterol Hepatol 
Nutr. 2013;16(4):219–224.
Koletzko S, Jones NL, Goodman KJ, et al. Evidence-based guidelines from 
ESPGHAN and NASPGHAN for Helicobacter pylori infection in 
children. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2011;53(2):230–243.
Kulik DM, Uleryk EM, Maguire JL. Does this child have appendicitis? A 
systematic review of clinical prediction rules for children with acute 
abdominal pain. J Emerg Med. 2013;66(1):95–104.
Li BU, Lefevre F, Chelimsky GG, et al. North American Society for Pediatric 
Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition consensus statement on the 
diagnosis and management of cyclic vomiting syndrome. J Pediatr 
Gastroenterol Nutr. 2008;47(3):379–393.
Moyer VA. Prevention of dental caries in children from birth through age 5 
years: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. 
Pediatrics. 2014;133(6):1102–1111.
Neidich GA, Cole SR. Gastrointestinal bleeding. Pediatr Rev. 
2014;35(6):243–253, quiz 254.
Papadopolou A, Koletzo S, Heuschkel R, et al. Management guidelines of 
eosinophilic esophagitis in childhood. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 
2014;58:107–118.
Pinto RB, Schneider AC, da Silveira TR. Cirrhosis in children and 
adolescents: an overview. World J Hepatol. 2015;7(3):392–405.
Pohl JF, Uc A. Paediatric Pancreatitis. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 
2015;31(5):380–386. PMID:26181572.
Preece ER, Athan E, Watters DA, et al. Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis: a 
rare mimic of acute appendicitis. ANZ J Surg. 2012;82(4):283–284.
Reilly S, Reid J, Skeat J, et al. ABM clinical protocol #18: guidelines for 
breastfeeding infants with cleft lip, cleft palate, or cleft lip and palate, 
revised 2013. Breastfeed Med. 2013;8(4):349–353.
Sahn B, Bitton S. Lower gastrointestinal bleeding in children. Gastrointest 
Endosc Clin N Am. 2016;26(1):75–98.
Saito JM. Beyond appendicitis: evaluation and surgical treatment of 
pediatric acute abdominal pain. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2012;24(3):357–364.
CHAPTER 132 
Peritonitis
ETIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
The peritoneum consists of a single layer of mesothelial cells 
that covers all intraabdominal organs. The portion that covers 
the abdominal wall is derived from the underlying somatic 
structures and is innervated by somatic nerves. The portion 
covering the viscera is derived from visceral mesoderm and is 
innervated by nonmyelinated visceral afferents. Inflammation 
of the peritoneum, or peritonitis, usually is caused by infection 
but may result from exogenous irritants introduced by penetrat-
ing injuries or surgical procedures, radiation, and endogenous 
irritants such as meconium. Infectious peritonitis can be an 
acute complication of intestinal inflammation and perforation, 
as in appendicitis, or it can occur secondary to contamination 
of pre-existing ascites associated with renal, cardiac, or hepatic 
disease. In this setting, when there is no other intraabdominal 
source, it is referred to as spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. 
Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis is usually due to pneumococcus 
and less often to Escherichia coli.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
 Decision-Making Algorithm
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Abdominal Pain
Peritonitis is characterized on examination by marked abdominal 
tenderness. Rebound tenderness also generally is quite pro-
nounced. The patient tends to move very little owing to intense 
peritoneal irritation and pain. Fever is not always present, and 
absence of fever should not be regarded as contradictory to 
the diagnosis. Patients who are taking corticosteroids for an 
underlying condition, such as nephrotic syndrome, are likely 
to have little fever and reduced tenderness.
LABORATORY AND IMAGING STUDIES
Blood tests should focus on identifying the nature of the 
inflammation and its underlying cause. An elevated white blood 
cell count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and C-reactive protein 
suggest infection. In children older than 5 years, appendicitis 
is the leading cause. Total serum protein, albumin, and urinalysis 
should be ordered to rule out nephrotic syndrome. Liver function 
tests should be performed to rule out chronic liver disease 
causing ascites. The best way to diagnose suspected peritonitis 
is to sample the peritoneal fluid with a needle or catheter 
(paracentesis). Peritoneal fluid in spontaneous bacterial peri-
tonitis has a high neutrophil count of greater than 250 cells/
mm3. Other tests that should be run on the peritoneal fluid 
include amylase (to rule out pancreatic ascites), culture, albumin, 
and lactate dehydrogenase concentration. For culture, a large 
sample of fluid should be placed into aerobic and anaerobic 
blood culture bottles immediately on obtaining the sample.
Appendicitis may be identified by ultrasound or computed 
tomography (CT) scan. When other intraabdominal emergen-
cies are suspected, such as midgut volvulus, meconium ileus, 


--- PAGE 526 ---
505
CHAPTER 132  Peritonitis
Teo S, Walker A, Steer A. Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis as a presenting 
feature of nephrotic syndrome. J Paediatr Child Health. 
2013;49(12):1069–1071.
van Heurn LW, Pakarinen MP, Wester T. Contemporary management of 
abdominal surgical emergencies in infants and children. Br J Surg. 
2014;101(1):e24–e33.
Verkade HJ, Bezerra JA, Davenport M, et al. Biliary atresia and other 
cholestatic childhood diseases: advances and future challenges. J Hepatol. 
2016;65(3):631–642.
Schwimmer JB. Clinical advances in pediatric nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease. Hepatology. 2016;63(5):1718–1725.
Somaraju UR, Solis-Moya A. Pancreatic enzyme replacement for people 
with cystic fibrosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;(10):CD008227, 
PMID:25310479.
Srinath AI, Lowe ME. Pediatric pancreatitis. Pediatr Rev. 2013;34(2):79–90. 
PMID: 23378615.
Tabbers MM, DiLorenzo C, Berger MY, et al. Evaluation and treatment of 
functional constipation in infants and children: evidence-based 
recommendations from ESPGHAN and NASPGHAN. J Pediatr 
Gastroenterol Nutr. 2014;58(2):258–274.
PEARLS FOR PRACTITIONERS
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, Crohn disease, gastroesophageal 
reflux disease (GERD), Addison disease, and leukemia.
•	 Deciduous teeth erupt in a predictable sequence and age. 
Significant delayed eruption may be associated with hypo-
thyroidism, Down syndrome, and other disorders.
•	 Cleft lip and palate are common birth defects; combined 
cleft lip and palate is more common in males and isolated 
cleft palate is more likely to be associated with other congenital 
malformations.
CHAPTER 128
Esophagus and Stomach
•	 As many as half of infants will have physiological reflux. 
The majority of infants do not benefit from acid reduction 
therapy.
•	 Gastroesophageal reflux disease occurs when there are 
complications of reflux such as poor growth, esophagitis, 
abdominal or chest pain, or respiratory problems.
•	 Reflux cannot be diagnosed based on imaging as this is only 
a snapshot in time. Upper gastrointestinal series evaluates 
for anatomical abnormalities.
•	 In an older child who has not improved with lifestyle changes, 
a trial with a proton pump inhibitor is recommended.
•	 Eosinophilic esophagitis should be considered in children 
with poor feeding or growth, chronic abdominal pain or 
vomiting, and in children with dysphagia or recurrent food 
impactions.
•	 Diagnosis of eosinophilic esophagitis requires endoscopy 
and biopsy. Overlap of findings is seen with gastroesophageal 
reflux disease.
•	 Treatment of eosinophilic esophagitis includes dietary changes 
or topical glucocorticoid therapy.
•	 The six food elimination diet (cow milk, soy, wheat, egg, 
peanuts, fish/shellfish) has been recommended as an approach 
to eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE).
•	 A neonate with poor feeding and drooling with a nasogastric 
tube on x-ray coiled in the neck most likely has a tracheo-
esophageal fistula.
•	 Button batteries in the esophagus must be removed imme-
diately. Two or more ingested magnets should be removed 
as soon as possible due to risk of perforation.
CHAPTER 126
Digestive System Assessment
•	 Take a careful history and perform a thorough but focused 
physical examination, using your findings to form a diag-
nostic hypothesis and plan.
•	 Surgical emergencies, such as bowel obstruction or appen-
dicitis, must be identified rapidly in children with acute 
abdominal pain. Common distinguishing characteristics 
include pain that is accompanied by vomiting, tenderness, 
abdominal wall rigidity, or guarding.
•	 Extraintestinal disorders (lower lobe pneumonia, pyelone-
phritis) may produce abdominal pain.
•	 When evaluating recurrent abdominal pain, a complete 
work-up must include not only a medical evaluation, but 
also assessment of functional impairment, such as missing 
school, and consideration of psychosocial factors influencing 
the pain.
•	 Recurrent abdominal pain is seen in 10% of school age 
children and is often functional.
•	 For patients with emesis, remember to distinguish between 
true vomiting (forceful retching, preceded usually by nausea) 
from regurgitation (effortless, usually no nausea) when 
considering the differential diagnosis.
•	 Emesis in a neonate suggests a gastrointestinal (GI) obstruc-
tion such as pyloric stenosis or volvulus; an inborn error of 
metabolism should be considered in the presence of acidosis, 
hypoglycemia, or hyperammonemia.
•	 When treating a patient with significant gastrointestinal 
bleeding, focus on fluid resuscitation and tissue oxygenation/
perfusion as your first priority.
•	 Acute diarrhea is often due to viral gastroenteritis (rotavirus, 
norovirus). Dysentery often presents with fever, pain, and 
diarrhea with blood and mucus.
•	 Painless rectal bleeding in a 2-year-old would suggest a 
Meckel diverticulum; older patients may also have a polyp.
CHAPTER 127
Oral Cavity
•	 Many systemic disorders affect the oral cavity, which 
careful examination can demonstrate. Examples include 


--- PAGE 527 ---
506
SECTION 17  Digestive System
•	 Infants with pyloric stenosis develop hypochloremic, 
hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis.
•	 The diagnosis of pyloric stenosis may be made with abdominal 
ultrasonography.
•	 Helicobacter pylori cannot be reliably tested by blood tests. 
Urea breath hydrogen testing, endoscopy with biopsies, and 
fecal antigen testing can be considered.
•	 Cyclic vomiting syndrome is a migraine variant that leads 
to repeated bouts of repetitive vomiting over hours to days.
CHAPTER 129
Intestinal Tract
•	 Bile-stained emesis in an infant may suggest a volvulus.
•	 Intestinal malrotation may lead to a volvulus with subsequent 
intestinal infarction.
•	 Passage of first meconium after 24 hours of life should raise 
suspicion for Hirschsprung disease.
•	 Hirschsprung disease is diagnosed by suction rectal biopsy.
•	 Duodenal atresia is associated with trisomy 21 and prema-
turity. There may also be polyhydramnios.
•	 Suspect Crohn disease in a child with poor growth, delayed 
puberty, fatigue, and abdominal pain. Initial testing may 
show anemia, thrombocytosis, elevated sedimentation rate 
and C-reactive protein, and hypoalbuminemia, but can be 
normal.
•	 Fecal calprotectin is an inflammatory marker of intestinal 
inflammation. Normal fecal calprotectin makes inflammatory 
bowel disease diagnosis unlikely.
•	 Recommended serological testing for celiac disease is the 
tissue transglutaminase antibody immunoglobulin A (IgA). 
Confirmation of the diagnosis by duodenal biopsy is recom-
mended prior to initiating a gluten-free diet.
•	 Celiac disease is associated with type 1 diabetes, thyroiditis, 
Turner syndrome, and trisomy 21.
•	 Intussusception is a common cause of acute colicky abdominal 
pain in toddlers; there may also be rectal bleeding and 
intestinal obstruction.
•	 The diagnosis of intussusception is suggested by abdominal 
ultrasonography but confirmed and treated by barium or 
air enema.
•	 Appendicitis can occur at any age but is most common in 
adolescents and young adults.
•	 Periumbilical pain followed by nausea followed by right 
lower quadrant pain is suggestive of appendicitis.
CHAPTER 130
Liver Disease
•	 Infants with jaundice that persists beyond a few weeks of 
life should have both total and direct (conjugated) bilirubin 
measured to assure that cholestasis is not missed.
•	 Neonatal giant cell hepatitis may be due to cytomegalovirus 
(CMV), herpes simplex, or syphilis.
•	 Alpha 1 antitrypsin deficiency may present like neonatal 
hepatitis.
•	 Alagille syndrome presents with chronic cholestasis due to 
paucity of bile ducts and is associated with itch, butterfly 
vertebra, and ocular posterior embryotoxon.
•	 Cholestasis in infants requires prompt investigation to identify 
treatable causes such as biliary atresia, choledochal cyst, 
and certain disorders of metabolism.
•	 Work-up of hepatitis in children requires consideration of 
more than just the classic hepatitis viruses and should include 
evaluation for autoimmune hepatitis, Wilson disease, and 
biliary obstruction, as well as measures of liver function.
•	 Wilson disease is associated with low serum ceruloplasmin 
and elevated urine copper.
•	 Consultation with a major referral center should be sought 
for any child with acute severe hepatitis or chronic 
hepatitis.
CHAPTER 131
Pancreatic Disease
•	 Fecal elastase is the preferred test for pancreatic 
insufficiency.
•	 Cystic fibrosis is the most common cause of pancreatic 
insufficiency in the United States.
•	 The diagnosis of acute pancreatitis is based on symptoms 
of severe epigastric abdominal pain and tenderness, increase 
of amylase and/or lipase more than three times the upper 
limit of normal, and/or imaging findings of pancreatic 
inflammation.
•	 Complications of pancreatitis include shock, pancreatic 
pseudocyst formation, and pancreatic abscess.
•	 Patients with pancreatitis may feed enterally if tolerated.
•	 In patients with recurrent pancreatitis, consider hereditary 
disorders such as cystic fibrosis or familial pancreatitis 
involving mutations in CFTR, PRSS1, SPINK1 or CTRC.
CHAPTER 132
Peritonitis
•	 Acute abdominal pain must be investigated rapidly with a 
comprehensive history and physical examination.
•	 When peritonitis is suspected, appropriate laboratory and 
imaging studies should be ordered to reveal underlying 
conditions, such as appendicitis.
•	 Nephrotic syndrome, heart failure, and chronic liver disease 
are associated with an increased risk of spontaneous bacterial 
peritonitis due to chronic presence of ascites.
•	 Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis is most commonly caused 
by Streptococcus pneumoniae or by Escherichia coli.
•	 Paracentesis 
is 
required 
to 
accurately 
diagnose 
pancreatitis.
•	 Analysis of ascites fluid obtained with a needle should include 
culture, cell count with differential, amylase, albumin, and 
lactate dehydrogenase.

