
Four year old child presented with puffiness of face swelling for past two days and
decreased urine output. Similar history two weeks back which spontaneously resolved
How will you clinically evaluate this child? (5)
Treatment of this child (5)
Newer medications for the treatment (3)

Vesico ureteric reflux
Renal tubular acidosis
Urinary tract infection in children- evaluation and management
Undescended testis
Evaluation of Ambiguous Genitalia
Drugs causing Nephrotic syndrome
Define Acute kidney injury
Medical management of Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia
Odour of urine in Phenylketonuria
Four causes of hematuria
Define polyuria

A three year old child was brought to casualty with complaints of hematemesis. There is past
history of similar episodes, which required blood transfusions. On examination, the
lethargic, and has splenomegaly. on, theid is pale,
What is the diagnosis? Justify (2)
Define chronic liver disease (2)
*What are the etiological causes of the above condition? (2)
What are the other clinical manifestations of the above condition? (2)
What are the expected complications of the above condition? (2)
Discuss the medical and other management of the above patient (5)

Management of acute diarrhoeal disease
Serological markers in Hepatitis B
Enzyme deficiency in Criggler Najjar Syndromes I and II 
Ophthalmologic manifestations of Wilson's disease
Pathogenesis and managerent of Parsectamol poisoning
Sunflower cataract seen in which condition?
Management of Hepatio encephalopathy
Classify dehydration and its menagement
Etiology of portal hypertension
Etiopathogenesis of persistent diarrhoea
Porto venous anastomosis
Hepatitis B virus
Normal INR range
Histological changes in Coeliac disease
Management of diabetic Keto acidosis in children
Wilm's tumor
Clinical features and management of acute watery diarrhoea with dehydration
 
Seven year old boy came to the Paediatric OPD with history of two episodes of vomiting of
blood since yesterday. O/E Bp: 104/64 mmg, Pulse rate 86/mt. Abdomen: spleen palpable
below the Left Costal Margin.
What is the most probable diagnosis?
Give two possible differential diagnosis?
What are the expepted complications of this condition?
How will you manage this child?

Hepato Renal Syndrome
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone
Vesico Ureteric Reflex & its grading
Imaging studies in urinary tract infection
Serological response in HBV infection
Histolopical changes in Coeliac disease
Write the causes of hyponatremia and its treatment
Diagrammatic illustrations of barium enema in Hirsprungs disease
Causes of constipation in children
Clinical features of Portal Hypertension in children
Obstructive Jaundice in Children
Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia
Management of vitamin D deficiency rickets
Treatment of Hyperkalemia
Steroid Resistant Nephrotic Syndrome
4 chief causes of AKI
Kramer's Index
Immediate management of a baby born to a HBS Ag +ive mother
Pathway of steroidogenesion
Endocrine causes of short stature
Non-glomerular causes of Hematurin
Morphology of urine crystals
Indication of Renal transplantation
Minimal change Nephrotic Syndrome
Renal biopsy indications