
--- PAGE 692 ---
670
SECTION 23  Endocrinology
The etiology of rickets usually can be determined by an assess-
ment of the mineral and vitamin D status (25-hydroxyvitamin D 
<8 ng/mL suggests nutritional vitamin D deficiency) (see Table 
176.1). Further testing of mineral balance or measurement of 
other vitamin D metabolites may be required.
Several forms of vitamin D can be used for treatment 
of the different rachitic conditions, but their potencies 
vary widely. Required dosages depend on the condition 
being treated (see Chapter 31). Rickets may also be treated 
with 1,25-hydroxyvitamin D and supplemental calcium. In 
hypophosphatemic rickets, phosphate supplementation (not 
calcium) must accompany vitamin D therapy, which is given 
to suppress secondary hyperparathyroidism. Adequate therapy 
restores normal skeletal growth and produces resolution of the 
radiographic signs of rickets. Nutritional rickets is treated with 
vitamin D given as a single large weekly dose or multiple smaller 
replacement doses. Surgery may be required to straighten legs 
in untreated patients with long-standing disease.
CHAPTER 177 
Disorders of Sexual 
Development
NORMAL SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT
The successive sequence of chromosomal sex, gonadal sex, and 
phenotypic sex leads to gender identity of the individual. Genes 
usually determine the morphology of internal organs and of 
gonads (gonadal sex); this directs the appearance of the external 
genitalia that form the secondary sex characteristics (phenotypic 
sex); self-perception of the individual (gender identity) and 
the perception of the individual by others (gender role) follow. 
In most children, these features blend and conform, but, in 
some patients, one or more features may not follow this 
sequence, leading to the disorder of sexual development (DSD; 
see Chapter 23).
The internal and external genitalia are formed between 6 
and 13 weeks of gestation. Fetal gonad and external genitalia 
are bipotential and have the capacity to support development 
of a normal male or female phenotype (Fig. 177.1). In the 
presence of a gene called SRY for sex-determining region on 
the Y chromosome, the primitive fetal gonad differentiates 
into a testis (Fig. 177.2). The Leydig cells of the testis secrete 
serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D. Renal function is assessed by a 
serum creatinine measurement or determination of creatinine 
clearance (Table 176.1).
Treatment of severe tetany or seizures resulting from hypo-
calcemia consists of intravenous calcium gluconate (1-2 mL/kg of 
a 10% solution) given slowly over 10 minutes while cardiac status 
is monitored by electrocardiogram for bradycardia, which can 
be fatal. Long-term treatment of hypoparathyroidism involves 
administering vitamin D, preferably as 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin 
D and calcium. Therapy is adjusted to keep the serum calcium 
in the lower half of the normal range to avoid episodes of 
hypercalcemia that might produce nephrocalcinosis and to 
avoid pancreatitis.
RICKETS
TABLE 176.1  Important Physiological Changes in Bone and Mineral Diseases
CONDITION
CALCIUM
PHOSPHATE
PARATHYROID 
HORMONE
25(OH)D
Primary hypoparathyroidism
↓
↑
↓
Nl
Pseudohypoparathyroidism
↓
↑
↑
Nl
Vitamin D deficiency
Nl(↓)
↓
↑
↓
Familial hypophosphatemic rickets
Nl
↓
Nl (sl↑)
Nl
Hyperparathyroidism
↑
↓
↑
Nl
Immobilization
↑
↑
↓
Nl
25(OH)D, 25-Hydroxyvitamin D; Nl, normal; sl, slight; ↑, high; ↓, low.
 Decision-Making Algorithm
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Hypocalcemia
Rickets is defined as decreased or defective bone mineralization 
in growing children; osteomalacia is the same condition in 
adults. The proportion of osteoid (the organic portion of bone) 
is excessive. As a result, the bone becomes soft and the metaphy-
ses of the long bones widen. In older infants, poor linear growth, 
bowing of the legs on weight bearing (which can be painful), 
thickening at the wrists and knees, and prominence of the 
costochondral junctions (rachitic rosary) of the rib cage occur. 
At this stage, x-ray findings are diagnostic.
In nutritional vitamin D deficiency calcium is not absorbed 
adequately from the intestine (see Chapter 31). Poor vitamin 
D intake or avoidance of sunlight in infants (exacerbated by 
those exclusively breastfed) may contribute to the develop-
ment of rickets. Fat malabsorption resulting from hepatobiliary 
disease (biliary atresia, neonatal hepatitis) or other causes (cystic 
fibrosis) also may produce vitamin D deficiency because vitamin 
D is a fat-soluble vitamin. Defects in vitamin D metabolism 
by the kidney (renal failure, autosomal recessive deficiency 
of 1α-hydroxylation, vitamin D-dependent rickets) or liver 
(defect in 25-hydroxylation) also can cause rickets.
In familial hypophosphatemic rickets, the major defect is 
failure of the kidney to adequately reabsorb filtered phosphate so 
that serum phosphate decreases and urinary phosphate is high. 
The diagnosis of this X-linked disease usually is made within 
the first few years of life and is typically more severe in males.

--- PAGE 693 ---
671
CHAPTER 177  Disorders of Sexual Development
absence of SRY, an ovary spontaneously develops from the 
bipotential, primitive gonad. In the absence of fetal testicular 
secretion of müllerian-inhibitory substance, a normal uterus, 
fallopian tubes, and posterior third of the vagina develop out of 
the müllerian ducts, and the wolffian ducts degenerate. In the 
total absence of androgens, the external genitalia appear female.
Classification
The terminology for conditions associated with variations in 
sexual development is evolving. Sometimes referred to as 
intersex, disorders of sex differentiation, or differences of sex 
development, DSDs are categorized under three main subgroups 
according to karyotype (XX, XY, and sex chromosome for 
mosaic karyotypes).
testosterone, which has direct effects (stimulating development 
of the wolffian ducts) but also is locally converted to dihydrotes-
tosterone (DHT) by the 5α-reductase enzyme. DHT causes 
enlargement, rugation, and fusion of the labioscrotal folds into 
a scrotum; fusion of the ventral surface of the penis to enclose 
a penile urethra; and enlargement of the phallus with ultimate 
development of male external genitalia. Testicular production 
and secretion of müllerian-inhibitory substance by Sertoli cells 
cause the regression and disappearance of the müllerian ducts 
and their derivatives, such as the fallopian tubes and uterus. 
In the presence of testosterone, the wolffian ducts develop into 
the vas deferens, seminiferous tubules, and prostate.
The female phenotype develops unless specific male influences 
alter development, although recent studies find there are female 
determining genes necessary for development as well. In the 
Genital tubercle
Urethral folds
Urogenital slit
Labioscrotal swelling
Anal pit
Tail
16.8 mm
Glans
Genital tubercle
Urogenital slit
Urethral folds
Labioscrotal
swelling
Anus
Glans penis
Clitoris
Urethral meatus
Labia minora
Vaginal orifice
Labia majora
Raphe
Scrotum
Anus
49.0 mm
45.0 mm
FIGURE 177.1  Differentiation of male and female external genitalia as proceeding from a common 
embryonic anlage. Testosterone acts at 9-13 weeks of gestation to virilize the bipotential anlage. In 
the absence of testosterone action, the female phenotype develops. (From Grumbach MM, Conte 
FA. Disorders of sexual differentiation. In: Wilson JD, Foster DW, eds. Textbook of Endocrinology. 
8th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1990:873; modified from Spaulding MH, Contrib Embryol Instit. 
1921;13:69–88.)

--- PAGE 694 ---
672
SECTION 23  Endocrinology
common cause of female ambiguous genitalia; it is most com-
monly the result of an enzyme deficiency that impairs synthesis 
of glucocorticoids, but does not affect androgen production. 
The impaired cortisol secretion leads to adrenocorticotropic 
hormone (ACTH) hypersecretion, which stimulates hyperplasia 
of the adrenal cortex and excessive adrenal production of 
androgens (see Chapter 178).
46,XY Disorders of Sexual Development
ABNORMAL SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT
46,XX Disorders of Sexual Development
Testosterone
Masculinization
of
urogenital sinus
and
external genitalia
Androgen-
sensitive
cell
Antimüllerian
hormone
Retrogression
of
müllerian ducts
HCG (LH)
SRY
XY
Testes
Leydig cells
Seminiferous
tubules
(Sertoli cells)
Transcription
and translation
Dihydrotestosterone
DHT: Androgen
receptor
FIGURE 177.2  A diagrammatic scheme of male sex determination 
and differentiation. SRY is the master gene controlling male sex dif-
ferentiation, but there are many other genes and their products that 
control male and female sexual differentiation. DHT, Dihydrotestos-
terone; HCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; LH, luteinizing hormone; 
SRY, the gene for the testis-determining factor. (From Wilson JD, 
Foster DW, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. 8th ed. Phila-
delphia: WB Saunders; 1992:918.)
 Decision-Making Algorithms
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Hypertension
Amenorrhea
Precocious Puberty in the Male
Precocious Puberty in the Female
Ambiguous Genitalia
Alkalemia
TABLE 177.1  Causes of Virilization in the Female
CONDITION
ADDITIONAL FEATURE(S)
P-450c21 deficiency (21 hydroxylase)
Salt loss in some
3β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 
deficiency
Salt loss
P-450c11 deficiency (11 hydroxylase)
Salt retention/hypertension
Androgenic drug exposure (e.g., 
progestins)
Exposure between 9 and 12 
weeks of gestation
Mixed gonadal dysgenesis or 
mosaic Turner syndrome
Karyotype = 46,XY/45,X
Ovotesticular DSD
Testicular and ovarian tissue 
present
Maternal virilizing adrenal or 
ovarian tumor
Rare, positive history
DSD, Disorder of sexual development.
 Decision-Making Algorithms
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Amenorrhea
Pubertal Delay
Ambiguous Genitalia
Gynecomastia
Masculinization of the external genitalia of genotypic females 
(except for isolated enlargement of the clitoris, which can occur 
from later androgen exposure) is always caused by the presence 
of excessive androgens during the critical period of development 
(8-13 weeks of gestation) (Table 177.1). The degree of virilization 
can range from mild clitoral enlargement to the appearance of 
a male phallus with a penile urethra and fused scrotum with 
raphe. Congenital virilizing adrenal hyperplasia is the most 
Underdevelopment of the male external genitalia occurs because 
of a relative deficiency of testosterone production or action 
(Table 177.2). The penis is small, with various degrees of 
hypospadias (penile or perineal) and associated chordee or 
ventral binding of the phallus; unilateral, but more often bilateral, 
cryptorchidism may be present. The testes should be sought 
carefully in the inguinal canal or labioscrotal folds by palpation 
or ultrasound. Rarely a palpable gonad in the inguinal canal 
or labioscrotal fold represents a herniated ovary or an ovotestis. 
The latter patients have ovarian and testicular tissue and usually 
ambiguous external genitalia. Production of testosterone by a 
gonad implies that testicular tissue is present and that at least 
some cells carry the SRY gene.
Testosterone production can be reduced by specific deficien-
cies of the enzymes needed for androgen biosynthesis or by 
dysplasia of the gonads. In the latter, if müllerian-inhibiting 
substance production also is reduced, a rudimentary uterus 
and fallopian tubes are present.
The complete form of androgen resistance or androgen 
insensitivity syndrome is the most dramatic example of resis-
tance to hormone action by defects in the androgen receptor. 
Affected patients have a 46,XY karyotype, normally formed testes 

--- PAGE 695 ---
673
CHAPTER 177  Disorders of Sexual Development
APPROACH TO THE INFANT WITH  
GENITAL AMBIGUITY
(usually located in the inguinal canal or labia majora), and female 
external genitalia with a short vagina and no internal müllerian 
structures. At the time of puberty, testosterone concentrations 
increase to normal or above normal male range. Because a 
portion of the testosterone is normally converted to estradiol 
in peripheral tissues and the estrogen cannot be opposed by 
the androgen, breast development ensues at the normal age of 
puberty without growth of pubic, facial, or axillary hair or the 
occurrence of menstruation.
5α-Reductase deficiency presents at birth with predomi-
nantly female phenotype or with ambiguous genitalia, including 
perineoscrotal hypospadias. The defect is in 5α reduction of 
testosterone to its metabolite DHT. At puberty, spontaneous 
secondary male sexual development occurs.
Sex Chromosome and Ovotesticular Disorders 
of Sexual Development
TABLE 177.2  Causes of Inadequate Masculinization in 
the Male
CONDITION
ADDITIONAL FEATURE(S)
P-450scc (StAR) deficiency
Salt loss
3β-Hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase deficiency
Salt loss
P-450c17 deficiency
Salt retention/hypokalemia/
hypertension
Isolated P-450c17 deficiency with 
17,20-desmolase deficiency
Adrenal function normal
17β-Hydroxysteroid 
oxidoreductase deficiency
Adrenal function normal
Dysgenetic testes
Possible abnormal karyotype; 
possible mutations in DAX1, 
SOX9, GATA4, WT1
Leydig cell hypoplasia
Rare
Complete androgen 
insensitivity
Female external genitalia, 
absence of müllerian structures
Partial androgen insensitivity
As previous with ambiguous 
external genitalia
5α-Reductase deficiency
Autosomal recessive, virilization 
at puberty
StAR, Steroid acute regulatory protein.
 Decision-Making Algorithms
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Short Stature
Pubertal Delay
Gynecomastia
 Decision-Making Algorithms
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Pubertal Delay
Ambiguous Genitalia
Turner syndrome and Klinefelter syndrome and their mosaic 
variants are classified as sex chromosome DSD. Mixed gonadal 
dysgenesis (45,X; 46,XY) often may present with genital ambigu-
ity, asymmetric external genitalia, and inguinal hernias. There 
may be virilization on one side and none on the other. Similar 
findings may be seen with ovotesticular DSD, another classifica-
tion of DSD.
Ambiguous genitalia in a newborn must be attended to with 
as little delay as possible and with informed sensitivity to the 
psychosocial context as required. The laboratory evaluations 
required might take days or weeks to complete, delaying a sex 
assignment and naming of the infant, such that choice often 
precedes diagnosis. Beyond infancy and childhood, and to offset 
any gender uncertainty in the patient and confusion in the 
parents, health care providers must help families come to an 
appropriate closure and gender choice. With that, most centers 
caring for patients with ambiguous genitalia include a behavioral 
health specialist with a focus on patients and families encounter-
ing these issues.
On physical examination, it is essential to note where the 
urethral opening lies and whether there is fusion of the anterior 
portion of the labioscrotal folds. Endogenous excessive produc-
tion of androgen (as in congenital adrenal hyperplasia [CAH]) 
in a female fetus between 9 and 13 weeks of gestation leads to 
ambiguous genitalia. If the vaginal opening is normal, and there 
is no fusion, but the clitoris is enlarged without ventral fusion 
of the ventral urethra, the patient likely had later exposure 
to androgens. In a patient with a fully formed scrotum, even 
if small, and a normally formed but small penis, termed a 
microphallus, the patient likely had normal exposure to and 
action of androgen during 9-13 weeks of gestation.
The major goal is a rapid identification of any life-threatening 
disorders (salt loss and shock caused by the salt-losing form 
of CAH). Although the classic approach to sex assignment 
has been based on the feasibility of genital reconstruction 
and potential fertility rather than on karyotype or gonadal 
histology, the effects of prenatal androgen must be considered. 
Experts recommend waiting until the child is able to be part 
of the dialogue regarding gender identity and reconstruction 
when appropriate. Present management of ambiguous genitalia 
involves extensive open discussion with parents involving 
the biology of the infant and the likely prognosis. Treatment 
should be individualized and managed by a team, including an 
experienced pediatric endocrinologist, urologist or gynecologist, 
psychologist, geneticist, and the primary care physician.
Diagnosis
The first step toward diagnosis is to determine whether the 
findings represent virilization of a genetic female (androgen 
excess) or underdevelopment of a genetic male (androgen 
deficiency; see Fig. 177.2). Inguinal gonads that are evident on 
palpation usually are testes and indicate that incomplete develop-
ment of a male phenotype has occurred; this pattern is not 
consistent, and ovaries and ovotestes may feel similar. Similarly, 
absence of female internal genitalia (detected by ultrasound) 
implies that müllerian-inhibiting substance was present and 
secreted by fetal testes. Karyotype determination is only one 

--- PAGE 696 ---
674
SECTION 23  Endocrinology
(end product is cortisol), and an inner reticularis (synthesizes 
sex steroids). The general scheme of these synthetic steps is 
shown in Fig. 178.1.
Hypothalamic corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) 
stimulates the release of pituitary adrenocorticotropic hormone 
(ACTH or corticotropin), derived by selective processing from 
pro-opiomelanocortin. ACTH governs the synthesis and release 
of cortisol and adrenal androgens. Primary adrenal insufficiency 
or cortisol deficiency from any defect in the adrenal gland results 
in an oversecretion of ACTH; adrenal insufficiency may also 
occur from ACTH (secondary) or CRH (tertiary) deficiency, 
resulting in low serum ACTH concentrations and low cortisol. 
Endogenous (or exogenous) glucocorticoids feedback to inhibit 
ACTH and CRH secretion. The renin-angiotensin system and 
potassium regulate aldosterone secretion; ACTH has little effect 
on aldosterone production except in excess, when it may increase 
aldosterone secretion.
Steroids that circulate in the free form (not bound to cortisol-
binding protein [transcortin]) may cross the placenta from 
mother to fetus, but ACTH does not. The placenta plays an 
important role in steroid biosynthesis in utero by acting as a 
metabolic mediator between mother and child. As the fetal 
CRH-ACTH-adrenal axis is operational in utero, any deficiencies 
in cortisol synthesis lead to excessive ACTH secretion. If a viril-
izing adrenal enzyme defect is present, such as 21-hydroxylase 
deficiency, the fetal adrenal gland secretes excess androgens, 
resulting in a virilized fetus. Normal variation of serum cortisol 
and ACTH levels leads to values that are high early in the 
morning and lower at night. This normal diurnal variation may 
take months to years to fully develop in neonates.
ADRENAL INSUFFICIENCY
of many factors needed to assist the family in the decision of 
sex of rearing; the SRY gene may be found on chromosomes 
other than the Y chromosome, and, conversely, a Y chromosome 
may lack an SRY gene (it may have been translocated to an X 
chromosome, leading to the development of a 46,XX male-XX 
sex reversal, testicular DSD).
Statistically, most virilized females have CAH; 90% of 
these females have 21-hydroxylase deficiency. The diagnosis 
is established by measuring the plasma concentration of 
17-hydroxyprogesterone and androstenedione (see Chapter 178), 
which typically is hundreds of times above the normal range. 
Other enzymatic defects also may be diagnosed by quantifying 
circulating levels of the adrenal steroid precursor proximal to 
the defective enzyme block.
Establishing an accurate diagnosis is more difficult in under-
developed males. When certain types of adrenal hyperplasia 
coexist with defects in androgen production of the testes, 
excessive ACTH secretion elevates substantially levels of specific 
adrenal steroid precursors, allowing a diagnosis. If the defect 
is restricted to testosterone biosynthesis, the measurement 
of testosterone and its precursors in the basal state and after 
stimulation by HCG may be required. Patients with normal levels 
of testosterone either have persistent androgen resistance or have 
had an interruption of normal morphogenesis of the genitalia. 
Abnormalities of the sex chromosomes may be associated with 
dysgenetic gonads, which may be associated with persistence 
of müllerian structures.
Treatment
Treatment consists of replacing deficient hormones (cortisol 
in adrenal hyperplasia or testosterone in a child with androgen 
biosynthetic defects who will be raised as male), surgical restora-
tion to make the individual look more appropriate for the gender 
of rearing, and psychological support of the whole family. 
Gonads and internal organs discordant for the gender of rearing 
may be removed. Dysgenetic gonads with Y-genetic material 
always should be removed because gonadoblastomas or 
dysgerminomas may develop in the organ. Age at which 
reconstructive surgery is recommended is controversial; some 
advocate that surgery not be performed in infancy or early 
childhood so that the child or young adolescent can be involved 
in the decision. A decision for gender of rearing is recommended 
from birth; however, the knowledge that the person with a 
DSD may change gender later on is shared with parents from 
the outset.
CHAPTER 178 
Adrenal Gland Dysfunction
PHYSIOLOGY
The adrenal gland consists of an outer cortex, which is respon-
sible for the synthesis of steroids, and an inner medulla derived 
from neuroectodermal tissue, which synthesizes catecholamines. 
The adrenal cortex consists of three zones: an outer glomerulosa 
(end product is the mineralocorticoid aldosterone, which 
regulates sodium and potassium balance), a middle fasciculata 
 Decision-Making Algorithms
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Ambiguous Genitalia
Hyponatremia
Hyperkalemia
The clinical manifestations of inadequate adrenal function 
result from inadequate secretion or action of glucocorticoids, 
mineralocorticoids, or both (Table 178.1). In the case of enzyme 
defects that affect the gonad and the adrenal gland, overproduc-
tion or underproduction of potent androgens can occur 
depending on the site of enzyme blockade (see Fig. 178.1). 
Progressive prenatal virilization of the external genitalia may 
occur in females while incomplete virilization may occur in 
males. Ambiguity of the external genitalia is a common mani-
festation of disordered fetal adrenal enzyme function. Precise 
diagnosis is essential for the prescription of appropriate therapy, 
long-term outlook, and genetic counseling. In patients with 
enzyme defects, an elevation in the precursor steroid is present 
proximal to the enzyme block and is metabolized through 
remaining normal alternate enzyme pathways, whereas a 
deficiency of steroids is present subsequent to the block.
The dominant clinical features of congenital adrenal min-
eralocorticoid deficiency are hyponatremia and hyperkalemia, 
usually developing by 5-7 days after birth but not immediately 
after birth. Vomiting, dehydration, and acidosis soon follow as 

--- PAGE 697 ---
675
CHAPTER 178  Adrenal Gland Dysfunction
in childhood, adolescence, or even young adulthood (not 
as glucocorticoid or mineralocorticoid deficiencies, but as 
androgen excess).
In patients with congenital adrenal hypoplasia or adrenal 
hemorrhage, the secretion of all adrenal steroids is low. In 
contrast, CAH leads to a diagnostic steroid pattern in blood 
and urine (see Fig. 178.1). Deficiency of 21-hydroxylase is the 
most common form (95%) and serves as a paradigm for these 
disorders.
21-HYDROXYLASE DEFICIENCY
does hypotensive shock from glucocorticoid deficiency. Death 
may occur if the disorder remains undiagnosed and untreated. 
In females, the ambiguity of the external genitalia is an obvious 
clue that salt-losing congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) or 
simple virilizing CAH must be ruled out. Because these forms 
cannot be distinguished clinically, all presentations of ambiguous 
genitalia should involve evaluation for mineralocorticoid defi-
ciency. In males, 21-hydroxylase deficiency (the most common 
form of CAH) does not cause abnormal genitalia; although 
there may be hyperpigmentation of the scrotal skin, this is a 
subtle sign and can result in delayed diagnosis. In all infants, 
the diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency may be overlooked or 
confused with pyloric stenosis. In pyloric stenosis, vomiting 
of stomach contents results in hypochloremia, low or normal 
serum potassium, and alkalosis in contrast to CAH, which 
has hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and acidosis. This distinction 
may be lifesaving in preventing unnecessary investigations or 
inappropriate therapy.
Not all forms of adrenal hyperplasia present at birth; 
the spectrum of disorder ranges from severe (classic) to 
mild (late-onset) or nonclassic. Milder forms may manifest 
FIGURE 178.1  Diagram of the steroid biosynthetic pathways and the biosynthetic defects that 
result in congenital hyperplasia. The defect in patients with lipoid adrenal hyperplasia is not (except 
for one reported case) in the CYP11A1 (cholesterol side-chain cleavage) enzyme, but in StAR, the 
steroidogenic acute regulatory protein. This protein is involved in the transport of cholesterol from 
the outer mitochondrial membrane to the inner membrane, where the CYP11A1 enzyme is located. 
CYP11B1 (11β-hydroxylase) catalyzes 11β-hydroxylation of deoxycorticosterone and 11β-deoxycortisol 
primarily. CYP17 (17α-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase) catalyzes 17α-hydroxylation and splitting of the 17,20 
bond, but for the latter it has preferential D5-17,20-lyase activity. CYP19 (aromatase) catalyzes the 
conversion of corticosterone to aldosterone. 3β-HSD I and 3β-HSD II, 3β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase/Δ4,5-isomerase types I and II; CYP21 (P450c21), 21-hydroxylase; 17β-HSD 3, 
17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 3. In the human, deletion of a homozygous null mutation of 
CYP11A (P450ccc) is probably lethal in utero, but a heterogeneous mutation caused congenital lipoid 
adrenal hyperplasia. (From Melmed S, Polonsky K, Kronenberg H, et al, eds. Williams Textbook of 
Endocrinology. 10th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2003:917.)
 Decision-Making Algorithms
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Hypertension
Precocious Puberty in the Male
Precocious Puberty in the Female
Ambiguous Genitalia
Hirsutism

--- PAGE 698 ---
676
SECTION 23  Endocrinology
Therapy must be adjusted throughout childhood at regular 
intervals. Overtreatment will cause growth stunting and weight 
gain (cushingoid features), whereas undertreatment will cause 
excessive height gain, skeletal advance, and early appearance 
puberty, ultimately jeopardizing adult height potential.
Late-onset CAH is typically noted years after birth. Affected 
subjects have milder manifestations without ambiguous genitalia, 
but they may have acne, hirsutism, and, in girls, irregular 
menstrual cycles or amenorrhea. Late-onset CAH in girls may 
be confused with polycystic ovarian syndrome.
Biochemical diagnostic studies show elevated levels of 
serum 17-OHP, the substrate for the defective 21-hydroxylase 
enzyme activity. In newborns with CAH, the values are elevated 
a 100-fold to a 1,000-fold. In late-onset CAH, an ACTH stimula-
tion test may be necessary to show an abnormally high response 
of 17-OHP. Serum cortisol and aldosterone levels (in salt losers) 
are low and renin levels are high, whereas the testosterone level 
is elevated because it is derived from 17-OHP.
The goals of treatment are to achieve normal linear growth 
and bone age advancement. Long-term therapy consists of 
providing glucocorticoids at a dose of approximately 10-15 mg/
m2/24 hr in three divided doses of oral hydrocortisone or its 
equivalent. Mineralocorticoid therapy for salt losers consists 
of fludrocortisone at a dose of 0.1-0.2 mg/24 hr, often with 
sodium chloride supplementation in infancy and early child-
hood. Surgical correction of ambiguous external genitalia may 
be considered. The adequacy of glucocorticoid replacement 
therapy is monitored by determining serum concentrations of 
adrenal precursors, including androstenedione and 17-OHP 
for 21-hydroxylase deficiency. In addition, the assessment of 
linear growth and skeletal age, by bone age determination, is 
required as a reflection of appropriate therapy. To avoid adrenal 
insufficiency, threefold higher doses of glucocorticoids are given 
during stressful states, such as febrile illnesses and surgery. 
Intramuscular hydrocortisone is used in severe emergencies or 
with illnesses involving emesis. Mineralocorticoid therapy is 
monitored with serum sodium, potassium, and plasma renin 
activity levels. Prenatal treatment with dexamethasone to sup-
press fetal ACTH-induced androgen production can reduce 
or eliminate the ambiguity of the external genitalia in affected 
female fetuses, if begun at approximately 7 weeks of gestation; 
however, this remains controversial.
OTHER ENZYME DEFECTS
Other enzyme defects are rare in contrast to 21-hydroxylase 
deficiency. In 11-hydroxylase deficiency, the next most common 
cause of CAH, virilization occurs with salt retention and 
hypokalemia as a result of the buildup of deoxycorticosterone 
(see Fig. 178.1), a potent mineralocorticoid. Hypertension 
develops as a result of excessive mineralocorticoid production. 
Table 178.2 summarizes the clinical and biochemical features 
of adrenal insufficiency in infancy.
ADDISON DISEASE
The incidence of classic 21-hydroxylase deficiency is about 1 
in 15,000 among various white populations. Nonclassic CAH 
may occur with an incidence of 1 in 50 in certain populations. 
The gene for 21-hydroxylase lies on the short arm of chromo-
some 6; the genotype may be determined in a proband, permit-
ting prenatal diagnosis in a subsequent pregnancy.
Deficient 21-hydroxylase activity (P-450c21 deficiency) 
impairs the conversion of 17-hydroxyprogesterone (17-OHP) 
to 11-deoxycortisol and in the salt-losing form, of progesterone 
to deoxycorticosterone, a mineralocorticoid proximal in the 
pathway to the production of aldosterone. The decreased 
production of cortisol causes hypersecretion of ACTH, which 
stimulates the synthesis of steroids immediately proximal to the 
block and shunting of these to overproduction of androgens. 
The primary clinical manifestation is the virilization of the 
external genitalia of the affected female fetus. The development 
of the uterus, ovaries, and fallopian tubes are unaffected by 
the androgens. The degree of virilization varies, ranging from 
mild clitoromegaly to complete fusion of labioscrotal folds, 
with severe clitoromegaly simulating a phallus (see Chapter 
177). A male infant with this defect appears normal at birth, 
although penile enlargement may be apparent thereafter. The 
deficiency in aldosterone, found in about 75% of patients, causes 
salt wasting with shock and dehydration until the diagnosis is 
established and appropriate treatment is given.
The treatment of 21-hydroxylase deficiency requires hydro-
cortisone and fludrocortisone in the case of the salt-losing form. 
TABLE 178.1  Clinical Manifestations of Adrenal 
Insufficiency
Cortisol deficiency
  Hypoglycemia
  Inability to withstand stress
  Vasomotor collapse
  Hyperpigmentation (in primary adrenal insufficiency with excess 
of adrenocorticotropic hormone)
  Apneic spells
  Muscle weakness, fatigue
Aldosterone deficiency
  Hyponatremia
  Hyperkalemia
  Vomiting
  Urinary sodium wasting
  Salt craving
  Acidosis
  Failure to thrive
  Volume depletion
  Hypotension
  Dehydration
  Shock
  Diarrhea
  Muscle weakness
Androgen excess or deficiency (caused by adrenal enzyme defect)
Ambiguous genitalia in certain conditions
 Decision-Making Algorithms
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Hyponatremia
Hyperkalemia

--- PAGE 699 ---
677
CHAPTER 178  Adrenal Gland Dysfunction
TABLE 178.2  Clinical and Biochemical Features in Newborn Adrenal Insufficiency
FEATURE
ELECTROLYTE 
DISTURBANCE*
AMBIGUOUS GENITALIA
SERUM 
CORTISOL
URINE 
11-DEOXYCORTISOL
17-OHP
DHEA
ALDOSTERONE
17-OHCS
17-KS
PREGNANETRIOL
VIRILIZED 
FEMALE
UNDERVIRILIZED 
MALE
Hypoplasia
Severe
No
No
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
Hemorrhage
Moderate to 
severe
No
No
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
StAR deficiency
Severe
No
Yes
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
3β-HSD
Severe
Yes
Yes
D
D
D
I
D
D
I
D
P-450c21 deficiency
Absent to severe
Yes
No
D
D
I
I
D
D
I
I
Aldosterone 
synthesis block
Severe
No
No
Nl
Nl
Nl
Nl
D
Nl
Nl
Nl
Pseudohypo­
aldosteronism
Severe
No
No
Nl
Nl
Nl
Nl
I
Nl
Nl
Nl
P-450c11 deficiency
None
Yes
No
D
I
Nl or I
Nl
D
I
I
Nl-sl I
P-450c17 deficiency
†
No
Yes
D
Nl-D
D
D
Nl-D
D
D
D
Unresponsiveness 
to ACTH
†
No
No
D
Nl-D
Nl-D
Nl-D
Nl-D
D
D
Nl-D
*Usually manifested after 5 days of age.
†High normal Na+ and low normal to low K+.
17-KS, 17-Ketosteroid; 17-OHCS, 17-hydroxycorticosteroid; ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; D, decrease; HSD, hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase; I, increase; Nl, normal; StAR, steroid acute regulatory protein.

--- PAGE 700 ---
678
SECTION 23  Endocrinology
Classic clinical manifestations of Cushing syndrome in children 
include progressive central or generalized obesity, marked failure 
of longitudinal growth, hirsutism, weakness, a nuchal fat pad, 
acne, striae, hypertension, and often hyperpigmentation when 
ACTH is elevated. The most frequent cause is long-term 
administration of exogenous glucocorticoids due to chronic 
medical conditions. Endogenous causes include adrenal 
adenoma, carcinoma, nodular adrenal hyperplasia, an ACTH-
secreting pituitary microadenoma resulting in bilateral adrenal 
hyperplasia (Cushing disease), or an extremely rare ACTH-
secreting tumor. Diagnostic tests include 24-hour urinary 
cortisol excretion, low-dose dexamethasone suppression test, 
high-dose dexamethasone suppression test (helps distinguish 
Cushing syndrome from Cushing disease), and late evening 
salivary cortisol sampling.
Treatment of Cushing syndrome is directed to the etiology 
and may include excision of adrenal, pituitary, or ectopic ACTH-
secreting tumors. Rarely, adrenalectomy is needed to control 
the symptoms. Parenteral glucocorticoid therapy is necessary 
during and immediately after surgical treatment to avoid acute 
adrenal insufficiency.
Suggested Readings
Backeljauw PF, Chernausek SD. The insulin-like growth factors and growth 
disorders of childhood. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 
2012;41(2):265–282.
Kliegman RM, Stanton B, St Geme J III, et al, eds. Nelson Textbook of 
Pediatrics. 19th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2011.
Nimkarn S, Lin-Su K, New MI. Steroid 21 hydroxylase deficiency congenital 
adrenal hyperplasia. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2011;58(5):1281–1300.
Palmert MR, Dunkel L. Clinical practice: delayed puberty. N Engl J Med. 
2012;366(5):443–453.
Péter F, Muzsnai A. Congenital disorders of the thyroid: hypo/hyper. Pediatr 
Clin North Am. 2011;58(5):1099–1115.
Romero CJ, Nesi-França S, Radovick S. The molecular basis of 
hypopituitarism. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2009;20(10):506–516.
Schatz DA, Haller MJ, Atkinson MA. Type 1 diabetes. Preface. Endocrinol 
Metab Clin North Am. 2010;39(3):481–667.
Williams RM, Ward CE, Hughes IA. Premature adrenarche. Arch Dis Child. 
2012;97(3):250–254.
Addison disease is a rare acquired disorder of childhood, usually 
associated with autoimmune destruction of the adrenal cortex. 
It is a form of primary adrenal insufficiency with absence of 
glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid.
Clinical manifestations are hyperpigmentation, salt craving, 
postural hypotension, fasting hypoglycemia, anorexia, weak-
ness, and episodes of shock during severe illness. Subnormal 
baseline and ACTH-stimulated cortisol values confirm the 
diagnosis. The presence of hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and 
elevated plasma renin activity indicate mineralocorticoid 
deficiency. Addison disease may occur within the context of 
autoimmune polyglandular syndromes (APS I and APS II). 
Other rare causes of adrenal insufficiency include adrenal 
leukodystrophy and conditions that affect the hypothalamus-
pituitary, whether acquired, such as in craniopharyn-
gioma, or iatrogenic, such as in irradiation for treatment of 
malignancy.
Replacement treatment with 10-15 mg/m2/24 hr of hydro-
cortisone is indicated, with supplementation during stress at 
three times the maintenance dosage or the use of intramuscular 
hydrocortisone. The dose is titrated to allow a normal growth 
rate. Mineralocorticoid replacement with fludrocortisone is 
monitored by plasma renin activity along with serum sodium 
and potassium determinations.
CUSHING SYNDROME
 Decision-Making Algorithms
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Short Stature
Hirsutism
Obesity
Alkalemia
Hyponatremia
Hypokalemia
PEARLS FOR PRACTITIONERS
CHAPTER 170
Endocrinology Assessment
•	 Hormones are defined as circulating messengers, with 
action at a distance from the organ (gland) of origin of the 
hormone.
•	 Endocrine disorders generally manifest from one of four 
ways: excess hormone, deficient hormone, abnormal response 
of end-organ, gland enlargement.
•	 The assessment of pituitary function may be determined by 
measuring some of the specific pituitary hormone in the 
basal state; other assessments require the measurement after 
stimulation.
CHAPTER 171
Diabetes Mellitus
•	 Type 1 diabetes mellitus is typically treated with multiple 
daily injections of a short-acting (bolus) insulin and a single 
dose of long acting (basal) insulin.
•	 Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disease and most often 
presents with hyperglycemia, ketoacidosis, polyuria, and 
polydipsia.
•	 Type 1 diabetes mellitus is a complex chronic illness that 
requires a team of providers, including endocrinologist, 
diabetes educator, nutritionist, social worker/psychologist, 
and close interactions for the family for success.

--- PAGE 701 ---
679
CHAPTER 178  Adrenal Gland Dysfunction
•	 Type 2 diabetes is associated with obesity and insulin 
resistance.
CHAPTER 172
Hypoglycemia
•	 After the initial 2-3 days of life, hypoglycemia is far less 
common and is more frequently the result of endocrine or 
metabolic disorders (although sepsis must always be ruled 
out).
•	 Clinical hypoglycemia is defined as a plasma glucose (PG) 
concentration low enough to cause symptoms and/or signs 
of impaired brain function.
•	 The most common causes for congenital hyperinsulinism 
involve inactivating KATP channel mutations and account 
for approximately 60% of all identifiable mutations.
•	 The diagnosis of hyperinsulinism in children is determined 
by evaluating markers of inappropriate insulin effects (e.g., 
suppressed ketogenesis) because plasma insulin concentra-
tions are frequently not clearly elevated.
•	 Idiopathic ketotic hypoglycemia, usually begins at about 18 
months of age in thin children and remits by 8 years of age, 
presents with symptoms of hypoglycemia after a period of 
prolonged fasting, often in the setting of an intercurrent 
illness with decreased feeding.
•	 The diagnosis of glycogen storage disease (GSD) is suggested 
by a hypoglycemia in the setting of hepatomegaly without 
splenomegaly (although GSD type 0 is not associated with 
hepatomegaly).
•	 A critical sample of blood and urine at the time of the 
hypoglycemic episode should be obtained before treatment 
for the measurement of glucose and insulin, growth hormone 
(GH), cortisol, free fatty acids (FFAs), and β-hydroxybutyrate 
and acetoacetate.
CHAPTER 173
Short Stature
•	 A normal linear growth pattern is good evidence of overall 
health and can be considered a bioassay for the well-being 
of the whole child.
•	 Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) acts primarily as a 
paracrine and autocrine agent and is most closely associated 
with postnatal growth.
•	 Accurate measurements of height (standing), or length (lying 
down), and weight should be plotted on the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention growth charts for the timely 
diagnosis of growth disorders.
•	 Short stature is defined as subnormal height relative to other 
children of the same gender and age, taking family heights 
into consideration.
•	 Nutrition is the most important factor affecting growth on 
a worldwide basis.
•	 Adequacy of GH secretion may be determined by a stimula-
tion test to measure peak GH secretion.
•	 A patient with classic GH deficiency has the appearance of 
a cherub (a chubby, immature appearance), with a high-
pitched voice resulting from an immature larynx.
•	 GH deficiency is treated with biosynthetic recombinant 
DNA-derived GH. Dosage is titrated to the growth rate, 
weight of the patient, and IGF-1 levels.
•	 The common condition known as constitutional delay in 
growth or puberty or both is considered a variation of normal 
growth, caused by a reduced tempo, or cadence, of physiologi-
cal development.
CHAPTER 174
Disorders of Puberty
•	 Pubarche results from adrenal maturation or adrenarche 
and is marked with the appearance of pubic hair, oiliness 
of hair and skin, acne, axillary hair, and body odor; gona-
darche is characterized by increasing secretion of gonadal 
sex steroids as a result of the maturation of the hypothalamic-
pituitary-gonadal axis.
•	 Puberty is delayed when there is no sign of pubertal develop-
ment by age 13 years in girls and 14 years in boys living in 
the United States.
•	 Disorders that can cause hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 
include congenital hypopituitarism, such as midline defects, 
tumors, infiltrative disease, and many syndromes, including 
Laurence-Moon-Bardet-Biedl, Prader-Willi, and Kallmann 
syndromes.
•	 Decreased gonadotropin function occurs when voluntary 
dieting, malnutrition, or chronic disease results in weight 
loss to less than 80% of ideal weight.
•	 Hypergonadotropic hypogonadism is characterized by 
elevated gonadotropins and low sex steroid levels resulting 
from primary gonadal failure.
•	 Turner syndrome is a common cause of ovarian failure and 
short stature; Klinefelter syndrome (seminiferous tubular 
dysgenesis) is the most common cause of testicular failure.
•	 When no secondary sexual development is present after the 
upper age limits of normal pubertal development, serum 
gonadotropin levels should be obtained to determine whether 
the patient has a hypogonadotropic or hypergonadotropic 
hypogonadism.
•	 Central precocious puberty, resulting in gonadarche, emanates 
from premature activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-
gonadal axis (gonadotropin-releasing hormone [GnRH]-
dependent); peripheral precocious puberty, gonadarche or 
adrenarche, does not involve the hypothalamic-pituitary-
gonadal axis (GnRH-independent).
•	 Compared with girls, boys with precocious puberty have a 
higher incidence of CNS disorders, such as tumors and 
hamartomas, precipitating the precocious puberty.
•	 The most common cause of GnRH-independent precocious 
puberty, McCune-Albright syndrome, is more frequent in 
girls than boys and includes precocious gonadarche, a bone 
disorder with polyostotic fibrous dysplasia, and hyperpig-
mented cutaneous macules (café-au-lait spots).
•	 The first step in evaluating sexual precocity is to determine 
which characteristics of normal puberty are apparent and 
whether estrogen effects, androgen effects, or both are present; 
laboratory evaluation includes determination of adrenal 
androgen and sex steroid levels (testosterone, estradiol, 
DHEAS [dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate]) and baseline 
gonadotropin concentrations.

--- PAGE 702 ---
680
SECTION 23  Endocrinology
•	 A prepubertal GnRH response is follicle-stimulating hormone 
(FSH) predominant, whereas a pubertal response is more 
luteinizing hormone (LH) predominant.
•	 Long-acting, superactive analogs of GnRH (leuprolide depot, 
histrelin depot) are the treatment of choice for central preco-
cious puberty; antiandrogens, antiestrogens, and aromatase 
inhibitors are used for peripheral precocious puberty.
•	 Most patients with isolated pubic hair do not have progressive 
virilization and simply have premature adrenarche (pubarche) 
resulting from premature activation of DHEA secretion from 
the adrenal gland; no treatment is needed.
CHAPTER 175
Thyroid Disease
•	 Early treatment in congenital hypothyroidism is essential 
to prevent delayed development.
•	 Hypothyroidism is common in children, and treatment with 
levothyroxine is typically initiated when a thyroid-stimulating 
hormone (TSH) is >10 mIU/L.
•	 Hypothyroidism must be considered in evaluation of short 
stature, especially if not associated with weight gain.
•	 Acquired hypothyroidism is an autoimmune disease and 
may be associated with type 1 diabetes, Addison disease, 
hypoparathyroidism, and celiac disease.
•	 Hyperthyroidism is initially treated with pharmacological 
therapy, and if remission does not occur, ablation or surgical 
removal is initiated.
•	 Most thyroid nodules in children and adolescents are benign.
CHAPTER 176
Disorders of Parathyroid Bone and Mineral 
Endocrinology
•	 Calcium and phosphate are regulated mainly by diet and 
three hormones: parathyroid hormone (PTH), vitamin D, 
and calcitonin.
•	 Neonatal hypocalcemia has multiple causes depending on 
timing of onset and may require treatment with intravenous 
(IV) and/or oral calcium.
•	 It is essential to make sure vitamin D is adequate as well as 
magnesium when replacing calcium.
•	 Hypocalcemia may be associated with multiple nonendocrine 
disorders and diseases, thus requiring a complete evaluation.
CHAPTER 177
Disorders of Sexual Development
•	 Genes usually determine the morphology of internal organs 
and of gonads (gonadal sex); this directs the appearance of 
the external genitalia that form the secondary sex charac-
teristics (phenotypic sex). Self-perception of the individual 
(gender identity) and the perception of the individual by 
others (gender role) follow.
•	 Sometimes referred to as intersex, disorders of sex differentia-
tion, or differences of sex development, disorders of sexual 
development (DSDs) are categorized under three main 
subgroups according to karyotype (XX, XY, and sex chromo-
some for mosaic karyotypes).
•	 Congenital virilizing adrenal hyperplasia is the most common 
cause of female ambiguous genitalia.
•	 Testosterone production can be reduced by specific deficien-
cies of the enzymes needed for androgen biosynthesis or 
by dysplasia of the gonads.
•	 Although the classic approach to sex assignment has been 
based on the feasibility of genital reconstruction and potential 
fertility rather than on karyotype or gonadal histology, the 
effects of prenatal androgen must be considered; experts 
recommend waiting until the child is able to be part of the 
dialogue regarding gender identity and reconstruction when 
appropriate.
•	 The first step toward diagnosis of ambiguous genitalia is to 
determine whether the findings represent virilization of a 
genetic female (androgen excess) or under development of 
a genetic male (androgen deficiency)
•	 Treatment of DSDs consists of replacing deficient hormones 
(cortisol in adrenal hyperplasia or testosterone in a child 
with androgen biosynthetic defects who will be raised as 
male), surgical restoration to make the individual look more 
appropriate for the gender of rearing, and psychological 
support of the whole family.
CHAPTER 178
Adrenal Gland Dysfunction
•	 Early diagnosis and treatment of salt wasting congenital 
adrenal hyperplasia involves replacement therapy with 
hydrocortisone, fludrocortisone, and saline solution.
•	 Adrenal insufficiency is associated with hyperpigmentation, 
salt craving, postural hypotension, fasting hypoglycemia, 
anorexia, weakness, and episodes of shock during severe 
illness.
•	 Cushing syndrome is commonly a result of chronic use of 
high-dose oral steroids.

--- PAGE 703 ---
681
SECTION 24 
NEUROLOGY
Jocelyn Huang Schiller  |  Renée A. Shellhaas
CHAPTER 179 
Neurology Assessment
A neurological evaluation, including history, physical examina-
tion, and judicious use of ancillary studies, allows the localization 
and diagnosis of nervous system pathology. The process and 
interpretation of the neurological examination varies with age; 
the newborn is unique, with many transient and primitive 
reflexes, whereas the examinations of adolescents and adults 
are similar. Careful evaluations of social, cognitive, language, 
fine motor, and gross motor skills, and their age appropriateness 
are key.
HISTORY
Gathering neurological history follows the traditional medical 
model with three additions: the pace and localization of the 
problem and the developmental assessment. The symptom evolu-
tion provides clues to the underlying process. Symptoms may 
evolve in a progressive, static, or episodic fashion. Progressive 
symptoms may present suddenly (seizures, stroke); acutely over 
minutes or hours (epidural hemorrhage); subacutely over days 
or weeks (brain tumor); or slowly over years (hereditary neu-
ropathies). Static neurological abnormalities are observed early 
in life and do not change in character over time (cerebral palsy). 
Static lesions are often caused by congenital brain abnormali-
ties or prenatal/perinatal brain injury. Intermittent attacks of 
recurrent, stereotyped episodes suggest epilepsy or migraine 
syndromes, among others. Episodic disorders are characterized 
by periods of symptoms, followed by partial or complete recovery 
(demyelinating, autoimmune, vascular diseases).
Careful evaluations of social, cognitive, language, fine motor, 
and gross motor skills are key (Chapter 7) to distinguish normal 
development from isolated or global delays. Loss of skills over 
time (regression) is particularly worrisome and may suggest 
an underlying degenerative disease, emerging autism spectrum 
disorder, epileptic encephalopathy, or other neurological 
diagnoses.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Observation of the child’s appearance, movement, and behavior 
begins at the start of the encounter. For example, the child may 
display an unusual posture, abnormal gait, or lack of awareness 
of the environment.
The brain and skin have the same embryonic origin 
(ectoderm), so abnormalities of hair, skin, teeth, and nails are 
associated with congenital brain disorders (neurocutaneous 
disorders) such as neurofibromatosis (NF type 1), in which 
café-au-lait macules (flat, light brown macules) are character-
istic. Adenoma sebaceum (fibrovascular lesions that look like 
acne on the nose and malar regions), nail fibromas, ash-leaf 
spots (hypopigmented macules), and Shagreen patches (flesh-
colored soft plaques with prominent follicular openings) are 
commonly seen in older children and adults with tuberous 
sclerosis.
The head circumference is measured in its largest occipi-
tofrontal circumference and plotted against standard growth 
curves (Chapter 5). Microcephaly and macrocephaly represent 
an occipitofrontal circumference 2 standard deviations below 
or above the mean, respectively. Measurements plotted over 
time may show an accelerating pattern (hydrocephalus) or 
decelerating pattern (brain injury, degenerative neurological 
disorder). The anterior fontanelle is slightly depressed and 
pulsatile when a calm infant is upright. A tense or bulging 
fontanelle may indicate increased intracranial pressure 
(ICP) but may also be seen in a crying or febrile infant. 
Premature closure of one or more sutures (craniosynostosis) 
results in an unusual shape of the head. Abnormal shape, 
location, or condition of the face, eyes, nares, philtrum, lips, 
or ears (dysmorphic features) are found in many genetic 
syndromes.
A careful ocular examination is essential and should 
include a search for epicanthal folds, coloboma, conjunc-
tival telangiectasias, and cataracts. Direct ophthalmoscopy 
assesses the optic discs and macula for abnormalities, such 
as papilledema or a cherry red spot. A complete examination 
of the retina involves dilating the pupil and use of indirect 
ophthalmoscopy.
Examination of the hands and feet may reveal abnormal 
creases or digits (Chapters 50 and 201). The neck and spine 
should be examined for obvious (myelomeningocele) or subtle 
(cutaneous dimples, sinus tracts, hair tufts, subcutaneous 
lipomas) midline defects. Nervous system abnormalities may 
result in kyphosis or scoliosis (Chapter 202).
NEUROLOGICAL EXAMINATION OF  
A NEONATE
The neonatal neurological examination primarily assesses the 
function of the basal ganglia, brainstem, and more caudal 
structures.

--- PAGE 704 ---
682
SECTION 24  Neurology
status and developmental examinations assess cerebral cortex 
function. The cranial nerve examination evaluates the integrity 
of the brainstem. The motor examination evaluates upper and 
lower motor neuron function. The sensory examination assesses 
the peripheral sensory receptors and their central reflections. 
Deep tendon reflexes assess upper and lower motor 
connections.
Mental Status and Developmental Evaluation
Alertness is assessed in infants by observing spontaneous 
activities, feeding behavior, and visual ability to fix and follow 
objects. Responses to tactile, visual, and auditory stimuli are 
noted. If consciousness is altered, the response to painful stimuli 
is noted. Observation of toddlers at play allows a nonthreatening 
assessment of developmentally appropriate skills. In addition 
to language function, older children can be tested for reading, 
writing, numerical skills, fund of knowledge, abstract reasoning, 
judgment, humor, and memory.
The simplest way to assess intellectual abilities is through 
language skills. Language function is receptive (understanding 
speech or gestures) and expressive (speech and use of gestures). 
Abnormalities of language resulting from cerebral hemisphere 
disorders are referred to as aphasias. Anterior, expressive, or 
Broca aphasia is characterized by sparse, nonfluent language. 
Posterior, receptive, or Wernicke aphasia is characterized by 
an inability to understand language, with speech that is fluent 
but nonsensical. Global aphasia refers to impaired expressive 
and receptive language.
CRANIAL NERVE EVALUATION
The cranial nerve evaluation assesses brainstem integrity, but 
depends on the stage of brain maturation and the ability to 
cooperate. A colorful toy may capture a young child’s attention 
and permit observation of coordination, movement, and cranial 
nerve function.
Mental Status
A healthy newborn infant should have periods of quiet, sustained 
wakefulness interspersed with sleep. Irritability, lethargy, or 
more severely depressed consciousness are nonspecific signs 
of abnormal brain function.
Reflexes
Examination of the primitive reflexes provides assessment of 
the functional integrity of the brainstem and basal ganglia (Table 
179.1). Many of these stereotyped motor responses are present 
at birth. They are symmetrical and disappear at 4-6 months of 
age, indicating the normal maturation of descending inhibitory 
cerebral influences. Asymmetry or persistence of the primitive 
reflexes may indicate focal brain or peripheral nerve lesions.
Motor Examination and Tone
Posture is the position that a calm infant naturally assumes 
when placed supine. An infant at 28 weeks of gestation shows 
an extended posture. By 32 weeks, there is a trend toward 
increase in tone and flexion of the lower extremities. At 34 
weeks, the lower extremities are flexed; the upper extremities 
are extended. The term infant flexes lower and upper extremities. 
Recoil, the readiness with which an arm or leg springs back 
to its original position after passive stretching and release, is 
essentially absent in very premature infants but is brisk at term. 
Because of the asymmetrical tonic neck reflex, it is essential 
to maintain the infant’s head in a neutral position (not turned 
to the side) during assessment of posture and tone. Spontaneous 
movements of premature infants are slow and writhing; those 
of term infants are more rapid.
NEUROLOGICAL EXAMINATION OF A CHILD
The purpose of the neurological examination is to localize or 
identify the region from which the symptoms arise. The mental 
TABLE 179.1  Central Nervous System Reflexes of Infancy
REFLEX
DESCRIPTION
AGE AT 
APPEARANCE
AGE AT 
DISAPPEARANCE
Moro
Light drop of head produces sudden extension followed by flexion of the 
arms and legs
Birth
6 mo
Grasp
Placing finger in palm results in flexing of infant’s fingers
Birth
6 mo
Rooting
Tactile stimulus at the side of the mouth results in the mouth pursuing the 
stimulus
Birth
4-6 mo
Trunk incurvation 
(Gallant)
Stroking the skin along the edge of vertebrae produces curvature of the 
spine with concavity on the side of the stimulus
Birth
4 mo
Placing
When dorsum of foot is brought into contact with the edge of a surface, 
infant places foot on the surface
Birth
4-6 mo
Asymmetrical tonic 
neck
With infant supine, turning of the head results in ipsilateral extension of 
the arm and leg with flexion of opposite extremities in a “fencing” 
posture
Birth
3 mo
Parachute
Infant is suspended face down by the chest. When infant is moved toward 
a table, the arms extend as if to protect self
8-10 mo
Never
Babinski
Stroking lateral aspect of sole from heel up results in dorsiflexion of the 
great toe and fanning of the remaining toes
Birth
12-18 mo

--- PAGE 705 ---
683
CHAPTER 179  Neurology Assessment
pinprick. Facial sensation can be functionally assessed in an 
infant by gently brushing the cheek, which will produce the 
rooting reflex (turns head and neck with mouthing movement, 
as if seeking to nurse).
Cranial Nerve VII
Facial muscles are assessed by observing the face during rest, 
crying, and blinking. At older, cooperative ages, children 
can be asked to smile, blow out their cheeks, blink forc-
ibly, and furrow their foreheads. Weakness of all unilateral 
muscles of the face, including the forehead, eye, and mouth, 
indicates a lesion of the ipsilateral peripheral facial nerve 
(Bell palsy). Since the upper third of the face receives 
bilateral cortical innervation, if the weakness affects only 
the lower face and mouth, a contralateral lesion of upper 
motor neurons in the brain (tumor, stroke, abscess) must be 
considered.
Cranial Nerve VIII
Lesions of cranial nerve VIII cause deafness, tinnitus, and 
vertigo. Normally, alert neonates blink in response to a bell 
or other abrupt, loud sound. Four-month-old infants turn their 
head and eyes to localize a sound. Hearing can be tested in 
a verbal child by whispering a word in one ear while cover-
ing the opposite ear. If there are any concerns about hearing, 
formal audiologic assessment is indicated. Delayed language 
development should trigger a referral for a formal hearing 
assessment.
Lesions of the vestibular component of cranial nerve VIII 
produce symptoms of vertigo, nausea, vomiting, diaphoresis, 
and nystagmus. Nystagmus is an involuntary beating eye move-
ment with a rapid phase in one direction and a slow phase 
in the opposite direction. By convention, the direction of the 
nystagmus is defined by the fast phase and may be horizontal, 
vertical, or rotatory.
Cranial Nerves IX and X
The gag reflex is brisk at all ages except the very immature 
neonate. An absent gag reflex suggests a lesion of the brainstem, 
cranial nerves IX or X, neuromuscular junction, or pharyn-
geal muscles. Weak, breathy, or nasal speech, weak sucking, 
drooling, inability to handle secretions, gagging, and nasal 
regurgitation of food are additional symptoms of cranial nerve X 
dysfunction.
Cranial Nerve XI
Observing the infant’s posture and spontaneous activity assesses 
the functions of the trapezius and sternocleidomastoid muscles. 
Head tilt and drooping of the shoulder suggest lesions involving 
cranial nerve XI. In later childhood, strength in these muscles 
can be tested directly.
Cranial Nerve XII
Atrophy and fasciculation of the tongue usually indicate a lesion 
of the anterior horn cells (spinal muscular atrophy). Assessment 
is most reliable when an infant is asleep. The tongue deviates 
toward the weak side in unilateral lesions.
Cranial Nerve I
Smell can be assessed in verbal, cooperative children older 
than 2 years of age. Aromatic substances (perfumes, vanilla) 
should be used instead of volatile substances (ammonia), 
which irritate the nasal mucosa and stimulate the trigeminal 
nerve.
Cranial Nerve II
Full-term newborns in a quiet awake state follow human 
faces, lights in a dark room, or large, opticokinetic strips. 
Visual acuity has been estimated to be 20/200 in newborns 
and gradually matures throughout childhood. Standard visual 
charts displaying pictures instead of letters can be used to 
assess visual acuity in toddlers. Peripheral vision is tested 
by surreptitiously bringing objects into the visual field from 
behind. A reduced pupillary reaction to light suggests anterior 
visual pathway (retina, optic nerves, chiasm) lesions. Unilateral 
lesions are identified by the swinging flashlight test. With an 
optic nerve abnormality, both pupils constrict when light is 
directed into the normal eye. When light is swung over to the 
abnormal eye, both pupils dilate inappropriately; this is called 
an afferent pupillary defect or Marcus Gunn pupil. Interruption 
of the sympathetic innervation to the pupil produces Horner 
syndrome (ptosis, miosis, and unilateral facial anhidrosis). In 
this instance, anisocoria (unequal pupils) is more pronounced 
in a dark room because the affected pupil is unable to dilate 
appropriately. Lesions of the posterior visual pathway, including 
the lateral geniculate, optic radiations, and occipital cortex, have 
normal pupillary light reactions but are expressed by loss of 
visual fields.
Cranial Nerves III, IV, and VI
These three cranial nerves control eye movements and 
are most easily examined with the use of a colorful toy to 
capture the child’s attention. For infants too young to fix 
and follow, rotating the infant’s head assesses oculocephalic 
vestibular reflexes (doll’s eye maneuver). If the brainstem is 
intact, rotating a newborn or comatose patient’s head to the 
right causes the eyes to move to the left, and vice versa. In 
awake, older patients, voluntary eye movements mask the 
reflex.
Abnormalities of these cranial nerves may cause diplopia 
(double vision). With unilateral third cranial nerve (oculo-
motor nerve) palsy, the involved eye deviates down and out 
(infraducted, abducted), with associated ptosis and a dilated 
(mydriatic) pupil. Injury to cranial nerve IV (trochlear nerve) 
causes weakness of downward eye movement with consequent 
vertical diplopia. Cranial nerve VI (abducens nerve) palsy results 
in the inability to move the eye outward. Cranial nerve VI has 
a long intracranial route within the subarachnoid space; failure 
of abduction of one or both eyes is a frequent, but nonspecific, 
sign of increased intracranial pressure (ICP).
Cranial Nerve V
The muscles of mastication can be observed as an infant sucks 
and swallows. The corneal reflex can test cranial nerves V 
ophthalmic division and VII at any age. Facial sensation of 
light touch and pain can be determined with cotton gauze and 

--- PAGE 706 ---
684
SECTION 24  Neurology
balance may be observed. The toddler gait is normally wide-
based and unsteady. The base of the gait narrows with age. By 
6 years, a typical child is able to walk on their toes or heels 
and can tandem walk (heel to toe). Cerebellar dysfunction 
results in a broad-based, unsteady gait accompanied by difficulty 
in executing turns. Corticospinal tract dysfunction produces 
a stiff, scissoring gait and toe walking; arm swing is decreased, 
and the affected arm is flexed across the body. Extrapyramidal 
dysfunction produces a slow, stiff, shuffling gait with dystonic 
postures. A waddling gait occurs with hip weakness due to 
lower motor neuron or neuromuscular disorders. A steppage 
gait results from weakness of ankle dorsiflexors (common 
peroneal palsy).
Reflexes
Deep tendon reflexes can be elicited at any age and are reported 
on a five-point scale:
0	 Absent
1	 Trace
2	 Normal
3	 Exaggerated reflex, with spread to contiguous areas (tapping 
a patellar reflex and observing a bilaterally brisk quadriceps 
response)
4	 Clonus (self-limited or sustained)
These reflexes are decreased in lower motor neuron dis-
eases and increased in upper motor neuron disease. Babinski 
response, or extensor plantar reflex, is an upward movement of 
the great toe and flaring of the toes on stimulation of the lateral 
foot and is a sign of corticospinal tract dysfunction. This reflex 
is unreliable in neonates, except when asymmetrical, because 
the “normal” response at this age varies. By 12-18 months of 
age, the plantar response should consistently be flexor (toes 
flexing down).
SENSORY EXAMINATION
The sensory examination of newborns and infants is limited 
to observing the behavioral response to light touch or gentle 
sterile pinprick. Stimulation of a limb should produce a facial 
grimace. A spinal reflex alone may produce withdrawal move-
ment of a limb. In a cooperative child, the senses of pain, touch, 
temperature, vibration, and joint position can be tested individu-
ally. The cortical areas of sensation must be intact to identify 
an object placed in the hand (stereognosis) or a number written 
in the hand (graphesthesia) or to distinguish between two 
sharp objects applied simultaneously and closely on the skin 
(two-point discrimination).
SPECIAL DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES
Cerebrospinal Fluid Analysis
Analysis of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is essential when central 
nervous system infection is suspected and provides important 
clues to other diagnoses (Table 179.2). Differentiating hemor-
rhagic CSF caused by a traumatic lumbar puncture (LP) from a 
true subarachnoid hemorrhage may be difficult. In most cases 
of traumatic LP, the fluid clears significantly as the sequence of 
tubes is collected. If there is clinical evidence of increased ICP 
(papilledema, depression of consciousness, focal neurological 
deficits), caution must be exercised before performing an LP 
to limit risk of cerebral herniation. A computed tomography 
(CT) scan should be performed and confirmed to be normal 
MOTOR EXAMINATION
Strength
In infants, strength is assessed by observation of spontaneous 
movements and movements against gravity. Extremity move-
ments should be symmetrical and are best seen when the infant 
is held supine with one hand supporting the buttocks and one 
supporting the shoulders. Strength is graded as follows:
5	 Normal
4	 Weak but able to provide resistance
3	 Able to move against gravity but not against resistance
2	 Unable to move against gravity
1	 Minimal movement
0	 Complete paralysis
Strength in toddlers is assessed by observing functional 
abilities, such as walking, stooping to pick up an object, and 
standing up from the floor. An older child should be able to 
easily reach high above his or her head, wheelbarrow walk, 
run, hop, go up and down stairs, and arise from the ground. 
Cooperative children can undergo individual muscle strength 
testing. Gower sign (child arises from lying on the floor by using 
his arms to climb up his legs and body) is a sign of significant 
proximal weakness. Subtle upper extremity asymmetry can 
be detected when the child extends arms out in front with the 
palms upward and eyes closed. The hand on the weaker side 
cups and begins to pronate slowly (pronator drift). Muscle 
fasciculations indicate denervation from disease of the anterior 
horn cell or peripheral nerve.
Tone
Tone represents the dynamic resistance of muscles to passive 
stretch. Lower motor and cerebellar lesions produce decreased 
tone (hypotonia). Upper motor lesions produce increased tone 
(spasticity). In extrapyramidal disease, an increase in resistance 
is present throughout passive movement of a joint (rigidity).
Bulk
Muscle bulk may be decreased due to disuse or to lower motor 
neuron or neuromuscular disease. Excessive muscle bulk is 
seen in rare conditions, such as myotonia congenita; boys with 
Duchenne muscular dystrophy have pseudohypertrophy of their 
calves.
Coordination
Ataxia is the lack of coordination of movement, which is typi-
cally due to a dysfunction of the cerebellar pathways. Observa-
tion and functional analysis help assess coordination in infants 
and toddlers. Watching the child sit or walk assesses truncal 
stability. Exchanging toys or objects with the child permits 
assessment of intention tremor and dysmetria (errors in judging 
distance), signs of cerebellar dysfunction. Cooperative children 
can do repetitive finger or foot tapping to test rapid alternating 
movements. Cerebellar and corticospinal tract dysfunction 
produce slow and irregular alternating movements.
Gait
Watching a child creep, crawl, cruise, or walk is the best global 
assessment for the motor and coordination systems (Chapter 
197). Subtle deficits and asymmetries in strength, tone, or 
