
--- PAGE 620 ---
598
SECTION 21  Oncology
TABLE 153.2  Common Manifestations of Childhood Malignancies
SIGN/SYMPTOM
SIGNIFICANCE
EXAMPLE
HEMATOLOGICAL
Pallor, anemia
Bone marrow infiltration
Leukemia, neuroblastoma
Petechiae, thrombocytopenia
Bone marrow infiltration
Leukemia, neuroblastoma
Fever, neutropenia
Bone marrow infiltration
Leukemia, neuroblastoma
SYSTEMIC
Bone pain, limp, arthralgia
Primary bone tumor, metastasis to 
bone
Osteosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, leukemia, 
neuroblastoma
Fever of unknown origin, weight loss, 
night sweats
Lymphoreticular malignancy
Hodgkin disease, non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Painless lymphadenopathy
Lymphoreticular malignancy, 
metastatic solid tumor
Leukemia, Hodgkin disease, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, 
Burkitt lymphoma, thyroid carcinoma
Cutaneous lesion
Primary or metastatic disease
Neuroblastoma, leukemia, Langerhans cell 
histiocytosis, melanoma
Abdominal mass
Abdominal/pelvic organ
Neuroblastoma, Wilms tumor, lymphoma, 
hepatoblastoma, germ cell tumor
Hypertension
Sympathetic nervous system tumor
Wilms tumor, neuroblastoma, pheochromocytoma
Diarrhea
Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide
Neuroblastoma
Soft tissue mass
Local or metastatic tumor
Ewing sarcoma, osteosarcoma, neuroblastoma, 
rhabdomyosarcoma, germ cell tumor, thyroid 
carcinoma
Diabetes insipidus, galactorrhea, poor 
growth
Neuroendocrine involvement of 
hypothalamus or pituitary gland
Germ cell tumor, adenoma, craniopharyngioma, 
prolactinoma, Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Emesis, visual disturbances, ataxia, 
headache, papilledema, cranial nerve 
palsies
Increased intrathecal pressure
Primary brain tumor; metastasis to the brain
OPHTHALMOLOGICAL
Leukocoria
White pupil
Retinoblastoma
Periorbital ecchymosis
Metastasis
Neuroblastoma
Miosis, ptosis, heterochromia
Horner syndrome: compression of 
cervical sympathetic nerves
Neuroblastoma
Opsomyoclonus, ataxia
Neurotransmitters (?)
Neuroblastoma
Autoimmunity (?)
Exophthalmos, proptosis
Orbital tumor
Rhabdomyosarcoma, neuroblastoma, lymphoma
THORACIC
Anterior mediastinal mass
Cough, stridor, pneumonia, 
tracheal-bronchial compression
Germ cell tumor, T-cell lymphoma/leukemia, Hodgkin 
disease, primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma
Posterior mediastinal mass
Vertebral or nerve root compression; 
dysphagia
Neuroblastoma, ganglioneuroblastoma, 
ganglioneuroma

--- PAGE 621 ---
599
CHAPTER 154  Principles of Cancer Treatment
Mediastinal masses from lymphoma can cause life-threatening 
airway obstruction. Tumors with a large tumor burden (e.g., 
lymphoma, leukemia) may affect renal function adversely from 
tubular deposition of uric acid crystals. Allopurinol or rasbu-
ricase can be administered before chemotherapy to minimize 
this effect.
A common metabolic emergency is tumor lysis syndrome, 
often seen in treatment of leukemia and lymphoma. Large 
amounts of phosphate, potassium, and uric acid are released 
into the circulation from lysed cells. Overwhelming infection 
and spinal cord compression with neurological compromise 
are other oncological emergencies.
SURGERY
Appropriate imaging (usually with computed tomography 
[CT] or magnetic resonance imaging [MRI]) for solid tumors 
presenting as a palpable mass or mass-related symptoms (pain, 
respiratory distress, intestinal obstruction) should be obtained 
and followed by resection (when possible) or biopsy (if complete 
resection is not feasible or indicated). Pediatric lymphomas 
are chemosensitive and rarely require complete surgical 
resection.
It is crucial to determine the amount of tissue required and 
the appropriate distribution of the tissue for testing so that all 
necessary studies are performed. A general oncological surgery 
principle is to resect not just the tumor but also, in most cases, 
a surrounding margin of normal tissue to ensure the entire 
tumor has been resected.
CHAPTER 154 
Principles of Cancer Treatment
The overall goal of pediatric oncology is to cure all patients 
with minimal toxicity. Treatment for children with cancer is 
often multimodal and may involve surgery, radiation therapy, 
chemotherapy, and immunotherapy. Surgery and radiation are 
generally local treatment modalities (an exception is total body 
irradiation as part of a bone marrow or stem cell transplant), 
whereas chemotherapy and immunotherapy have both local and 
systemic effects.
Primary prevention strategies for most pediatric malignancies 
are unknown. Two exceptions are the use of hepatitis B vaccine 
to lower the rates of hepatocellular carcinoma and the use of 
human papillomavirus vaccine to reduce the risk of genitouri-
nary and oropharyngeal cancers. Childhood malignancies are 
not associated with tobacco or alcohol use, dietary factors, or 
sun exposure. Treatment with certain chemotherapy agents and 
radiation therapy increases the rate of second malignancies. 
Secondary prevention may be accomplished by screening the 
at-risk child (e.g., a child with Beckwith-Wiedemann syn-
drome or twin of a leukemia patient), but these opportunities 
are rare.
ONCOLOGICAL EMERGENCIES
Adverse effects of tumors and treatments may result in onco-
logical emergencies in children and adolescents (Table 154.1). 
TABLE 153.3  Minimum Work-Up Required for Common Pediatric Malignancies to Assess Primary Tumor and Potential 
Metastases*
MALIGNANCY
BMA/bx
CXR
CT Scan
MRI
BONE SCAN, 
PET SCAN, or 
PET-CT SCAN
CSF ANALYSIS
MARKER(S)
OTHER
Leukemia
Yes
Yes
—
—
—
Yes
—
—
Non-Hodgkin 
lymphoma
Yes
Yes
Yes
—
Yes
Yes
—
—
Hodgkin lymphoma
Yes
Yes
Yes
—
Yes
—
—
—
CNS tumors
—
—
—
Yes
—
Yes
—
—
Neuroblastoma
Yes
—
Yes
—
Yes
—
VMA, HVA
mIBG scan
Wilms tumor
—
Yes
Yes
—
—
—
—
—
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Yes
Yes
Yes
—
Yes
Yes, for 
parameningeal 
tumors only
—
—
Osteosarcoma
—
Yes
Yes (chest)
Yes (primary)
Yes
—
—
—
Ewing sarcoma
Yes
Yes
Yes (chest)
Yes (primary)
Yes
—
—
—
Germ cell tumors
—
Yes
Yes
—
—
—
AFP, 
β-hCG
Consider 
brain MRI
Liver tumors
—
Yes
Yes
—
—
—
AFP
—
Retinoblastoma
±
—
Yes, if MRI 
not available
Yes (brain)
±
Yes
—
Rb gene 
analysis
*Individual cases may require additional studies.
AFP, Alpha-fetoprotein; β-hCG, beta-human chorionic gonadotropin; BMA/bx, bone marrow aspirate/biopsy; CNS, central nervous system; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; 
CT, computed tomography; CXR, chest x-ray; HVA, homovanillic acid; mIBG, metaiodobenzylguanidine; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PET, positron emission 
tomography; Rb, retinoblastoma; VMA, vanillylmandelic acid.

--- PAGE 622 ---
600
SECTION 21  Oncology
TABLE 154.1  Oncological Emergencies
CONDITION
MANIFESTATIONS
ETIOLOGY
MALIGNANCY
TREATMENT
METABOLIC
Hyperuricemia
Uric acid nephropathy, 
renal insufficiency or 
failure
Tumor lysis syndrome
Lymphoma, leukemia
Allopurinol; hydration; 
rasburicase
Hyperkalemia
Arrhythmias
Tumor lysis syndrome
Lymphoma, leukemia
Kayexalate; sodium 
bicarbonate; glucose plus 
insulin
Hyperphosphatemia
Hypocalcemic tetany; 
metastatic calcification, 
photophobia, pruritus
Tumor lysis syndrome
Lymphoma, leukemia
Hydration, diuresis; oral 
aluminum hydroxide to 
bind phosphate
Hypercalcemia
Anorexia, nausea, 
polyuria, pancreatitis, 
gastric ulcers; prolonged 
PR/shortened QT interval
Bone resorption; ectopic 
parathormone, vitamin D, 
or prostaglandins
Metastasis to bone, 
rhabdomyosarcoma
Hydration and furosemide 
diuresis; corticosteroids; 
mithramycin; calcitonin, 
diphosphonates
HEMATOLOGICAL
Anemia
Pallor, weakness, heart 
failure
Bone marrow suppression 
or infiltration; blood loss
Any with chemotherapy
Packed red blood cell 
transfusion
Thrombocytopenia
Petechiae, hemorrhage
Bone marrow suppression 
or infiltration
Any with chemotherapy
Platelet transfusion
Disseminated 
intravascular coagulation
Shock, hemorrhage
Sepsis, hypotension, 
tumor factors
Promyelocytic leukemia, 
others
Fresh frozen plasma; 
platelets, treat infection
Neutropenia
Infection
Bone marrow suppression 
or infiltration
Any with chemotherapy
If patient is febrile, 
administer broad-
spectrum antibiotics, 
consider filgrastim (G-CSF)
Hyperleukocytosis (WBC 
≥50,000/mm3)
Hemorrhage, thrombosis; 
pulmonary infiltrates, 
hypoxia; tumor lysis 
syndrome
Leukostasis; vascular 
occlusion
Leukemia
Hydration; chemotherapy; 
leukapheresis?
Graft-versus-host disease
Dermatitis, diarrhea, 
hepatitis
Immunosuppression and 
nonirradiated blood 
products; bone marrow 
transplantation
Any with 
immunosuppression
Corticosteroids; 
cyclosporine; 
methotrexate; tacrolimus; 
mycophenolate mofetil; 
antithymocyte globulin
SPACE-OCCUPYING LESIONS
Spinal cord compression
Back pain, motor and 
sensory deficits
Invasion of spinal canal by 
primary tumor or 
metastases
Neuroblastoma, 
medulloblastoma
MRI for diagnosis; 
corticosteroids; radiation 
therapy; laminectomy; 
chemotherapy
Increased intracranial 
pressure
Headache, confusion, 
coma, emesis, headache, 
hypertension, 
bradycardia, seizures, 
papilledema, 
hydrocephalus; cranial 
nerve III and VI palsies
Primary or metastatic 
brain tumor
Astrocytoma, 
medulloblastoma, others; 
neuroblastoma
CT or MRI for diagnosis; 
corticosteroids; 
ventriculoperitoneal shunt; 
radiation therapy; 
chemotherapy
Superior vena cava 
syndrome
Distended neck veins, 
plethora, edema of head 
and neck, cyanosis, 
proptosis; Horner 
syndrome
Superior mediastinal mass
Lymphoma
Chemotherapy; radiation 
therapy
Tracheal compression
Respiratory distress
Mediastinal mass 
compressing trachea
Lymphoma
Radiation therapy, 
corticosteroids
CNS, Central nervous system; CT, computed tomography; G-CSF, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; WBC, white blood cell.

--- PAGE 623 ---
601
CHAPTER 154  Principles of Cancer Treatment
TABLE 154.2  Cancer Chemotherapy
DRUG
ACTION
INDICATION
ACUTE TOXICITY*
ANTIMETABOLITES
Methotrexate
Folic acid antagonist; 
inhibits dihydrofolate 
reductase
ALL, lymphoma, 
medulloblastoma, 
osteosarcoma
Myelosuppression (nadir 7-10 days), 
mucositis, dermatitis, hepatitis, renal 
and CNS effects with high-dose 
administration; prevent with hydration 
and leucovorin, monitor levels
6-Mercaptopurine
Purine analog
ALL
Myelosuppression; hepatitis; mucositis; 
allopurinol increases toxicity
Cytosine arabinoside 
(Ara-C)
Pyrimidine analog; 
inhibits DNA polymerase
ALL, AML, lymphoma
Myelosuppression, conjunctivitis, 
mucositis, neurotoxicity
ALKYLATING AGENTS
Cyclophosphamide
Alkylates guanine; 
inhibits DNA synthesis
ALL, lymphoma, sarcoma, 
brain tumors
Myelosuppression; hemorrhagic cystitis
Ifosfamide
Similar to 
cyclophosphamide
Lymphoma, Wilms tumor, 
sarcoma, germ cell and 
testicular tumors
Similar to cyclophosphamide; 
neurotoxicity, cardiac toxicity
Carmustine (BCNU), 
lomustine (CCNU)
Carbamylation of DNA; 
inhibits DNA synthesis
CNS tumors, lymphoma, 
Hodgkin disease
Delayed myelosuppression (4-6 wk); 
pulmonary fibrosis, carcinogenic, 
stomatitis
Continued
OTHER THERAPIES
Certain cancers have been treated with biological response 
modifiers, tyrosine kinase inhibitors, or monoclonal antibodies 
in addition to standard treatments. Targeted therapies specifi-
cally target the tumor cells, sparing normal host cells. Imatinib 
and dasatinib are tyrosine kinase inhibitors that target the effects 
of the t(9;22) translocation (BCR-ABL) of chronic myeloid 
leukemia and acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Rituximab is a 
monoclonal antibody directed against the cell surface antigen 
CD20 expressed in some lymphomas. Dinutuximab is an 
anti-GD2 monoclonal antibody used for neuroblastoma. Chimeric 
antigen receptor T-cell therapy and bi-specific T-cell engager 
therapy are immunotherapies that leverage the patient’s own 
T cells to kill cancer cells.
Supportive care also plays an important role in pediatric 
oncology, including the use of appropriate antimicrobial agents, 
blood products, nutritional support, intensive care, and integra-
tive therapies.
ADVERSE EFFECTS
Because chemotherapy agents are cellular toxins, numerous 
adverse effects are associated with their use. Bone marrow 
suppression, immunosuppression, nausea, vomiting, and alopecia 
are general adverse effects of commonly used chemotherapy 
drugs. Each chemotherapy drug also has specific toxicities. 
Doxorubicin can cause cardiac damage; cisplatin can cause 
renal damage and ototoxicity; cyclophosphamide and ifosfamide 
can cause hemorrhagic cystitis; and vincristine can cause 
peripheral neuropathy. Radiation therapy produces many adverse 
effects such as mucositis, growth retardation, organ dysfunction, 
and the later development of secondary cancers. Significant 
therapy-related late effects may develop in pediatric cancer 
patients (Table 154.3).
CHEMOTHERAPY
Because most pediatric solid tumors have a high risk for micro-
metastatic disease at the time of diagnosis, chemotherapy is used 
in almost all cases (Table 154.2). Exceptions include low-stage 
neuroblastoma and Wilms tumor (particularly in infants) and 
low-grade central nervous system (CNS) tumors. For patients 
with localized solid tumors, chemotherapy administered 
after removal of the primary tumor is referred to as adjuvant 
therapy. Chemotherapy administered while the primary tumor 
is still present is referred to as neoadjuvant chemotherapy. 
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy has a number of potential benefits, 
including an early attack on presumed micrometastatic disease, 
shrinkage of the primary tumor to facilitate local control, and 
additional time to plan for definitive surgery.
Resistance to particular chemotherapeutic agents can develop 
relatively quickly. Thus combinations of chemotherapy drugs are 
used, as opposed to sequential single agents, to treat childhood 
cancer. The blood-brain barrier prevents the penetration of 
chemotherapeutic drugs into the CNS. Thus administration 
of the chemotherapeutic agent directly into the cerebrospinal 
fluid (by lumbar puncture) is used for leukemia and lym-
phoma. Radiation therapy also circumvents the blood-brain 
barrier.
RADIATION THERAPY
Radiation therapy is the process of delivering ionizing 
radiation to malignant cells to kill them directly or, more 
commonly, prevent them from dividing by interfering 
with DNA replication. Conventional radiation therapy uses 
photons, but atomic particles such as electrons, protons, and 
neutrons can also be used. Not all tumors are radiosensitive, 
and radiation therapy is not necessary in all tumors that are 
radiosensitive.

--- PAGE 624 ---
602
SECTION 21  Oncology
DRUG
ACTION
INDICATION
ACUTE TOXICITY*
Cisplatin
Inhibits DNA synthesis
Osteosarcoma, 
neuroblastoma, CNS tumors, 
germ cell tumors
Nephrotoxic; myelosuppression, 
ototoxicity, neurotoxicity, hemolytic 
uremic syndrome
Carboplatin
Inhibits DNA synthesis
Same as for cisplatin
Myelosuppression
TOPOISOMERASE INHIBITORS
Doxorubicin and 
daunorubicin
Intercalation, DNA 
strand breaks
ALL, AML, osteosarcoma, 
Ewing sarcoma, lymphoma, 
neuroblastoma
Cardiomyopathy, red urine, tissue 
necrosis on extravasation, 
myelosuppression, conjunctivitis, 
radiation dermatitis, arrhythmia
Dactinomycin
Intercalation, DNA 
strand breaks
Wilms tumor, 
rhabdomyosarcoma, Ewing 
sarcoma
Tissue necrosis on extravasation, 
myelosuppression, hepatopathy with 
thrombocytopenia, stomatitis
Etoposide (VP-16)
DNA strand breaks
ALL, AML, lymphoma, germ 
cell tumor, sarcoma
Myelosuppression, secondary 
leukemia, allergic reaction
Topotecan
DNA strand breaks
Neuroblastoma, 
rhabdomyosarcoma
Myelosuppression, diarrhea, mucositis
TUBULIN INHIBITORS
Vincristine
Inhibits microtubule 
formation
ALL, lymphoma, Wilms tumor, 
Hodgkin disease, Ewing 
sarcoma, neuroblastoma, 
rhabdomyosarcoma, brain 
tumors
Local cellulitis, peripheral neuropathy, 
constipation, ileus, jaw pain, 
inappropriate ADH secretion, seizures, 
ptosis, minimal myelosuppression
Vinblastine
Inhibits microtubule 
formation
Hodgkin disease, Langerhans 
cell histiocytosis
Local cellulitis, myelosuppression
ENZYME
Asparaginase
Depletion of asparagine
ALL, AML
Allergic reaction; pancreatitis, 
hyperglycemia, platelet dysfunction 
and coagulopathy, encephalopathy, 
stroke, thrombosis
HORMONES
Prednisone, 
dexamethasone
Direct lymphocyte 
cytotoxicity
ALL; Hodgkin disease, 
lymphoma
Cushing syndrome, cataracts, diabetes, 
hypertension, myopathy, osteoporosis, 
infection, peptic ulceration, irritability, 
psychosis, hunger, fluid retention
MONOCLONAL ANTIBODIES
Rituximab
Anti-CD20
CD20+ B-cell leukemia, 
lymphoma
Fever, chills, allergy
Brentuximab
Anti-CD30
CD30+ lymphomas
Myelosuppression, peripheral 
neuropathy, fatigue, fever
Blinatumomab
Anti-CD19 and anti-CD3
CD19+ refractory 
B-lymphoblastic leukemia
Cytokine release syndrome, 
neurotoxicity
Dinutuximab
Anti-GD2
High-risk neuroblastoma
Neuropathic pain, hypotension, 
hypoxia, fever, capillary leak syndrome, 
hypersensitivity reactions
SMALL MOLECULE PATHWAY INHIBITORS
Imatinib
Inhibits BCR-ABL, VEGF, 
c-KIT kinases
Ph+ CML, ALL
Nausea, vomiting, fatigue, headache
Dasatinib
Inhibits BCR-ABL, c-KIT, 
and other kinases
Ph+ CML, ALL
Fluid retention, rash, nausea
MISCELLANEOUS
Tretinoin (all-trans 
retinoic acid) and 
isotretinoin (cis-
retinoic acid)
Promotes differentiation
Acute promyelocytic leukemia 
(ATRA); neuroblastoma (CRA)
Fever, respiratory distress, leukocytosis 
(ATRA); dry mouth, hair loss, 
pseudotumor cerebri (CRA)
Arsenic
Promotes differentiation, 
apoptosis
Acute promyelocytic leukemia
Transaminitis, nausea, vomiting, 
abdominal pain, QTc prolongation
*Many drugs produce nausea and vomiting during administration; many cause alopecia with repeated doses.
ADH, Antidiuretic hormone; ALL, acute lymphoblastic leukemia; AML, acute myeloid leukemia; ATRA, all-trans retinoic acid; CML, chronic myeloid leukemia; CNS, 
central nervous system; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor.
TABLE 154.2  Cancer Chemotherapy—cont’d

--- PAGE 625 ---
603
CHAPTER 155  Leukemia
EPIDEMIOLOGY
ALL accounts for approximately 75%, acute myeloid leukemia 
(AML) accounts for approximately 20%, and CML accounts 
for less than 5% of leukemia cases in the pediatric population. 
Other chronic leukemias, including juvenile myelomonocytic 
leukemia, chronic myelomonocytic leukemia, and chronic 
lymphocytic leukemia, are rare in childhood. ALL is the most 
common childhood cancer, comprising 25% of cancer prior 
to the age of 15 years (40 per 1 million children under the age 
of 15 years) and 19% of cancer prior to the age of 20 years.
ALL is classified according to lymphoid lineage as either 
B cell or T cell. The incidence of B-lineage ALL peaks at 2-5 
years of age and is slightly more common in boys than in girls. 
T-cell ALL is associated with male predominance and an older 
age of onset. In the United States, ALL is more common in 
whites than in African American children. The incidence of 
AML is relatively higher in the neonatal period, then drops 
and stabilizes until adolescence when there is a slight increase, 
which continues into adulthood (especially beyond 55 years of 
age). Males and females are equally affected by AML. Hispanic 
and African American children have a slightly higher incidence 
of AML than white children.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
TABLE 154.3  Long-Term Sequelae of Cancer Therapy
PROBLEM
ETIOLOGICAL AGENT(S)
Infertility
Alkylating agents; radiation
Second cancers
Genetic predisposition; radiation; 
alkylating agents, etoposide, 
topoisomerase II inhibitors
Sepsis
Splenectomy
Hepatotoxicity
Methotrexate, 6-mercaptopurine; 
radiation
Hepatic venoocclusive 
disease
High-dose, intensive chemotherapy 
(busulfan, cyclophosphamide) ± 
bone marrow transplant
Scoliosis
Radiation
Pulmonary (fibrosis)
Radiation; bleomycin, busulfan
Cardiomyopathy
Doxorubicin, daunorubicin; radiation
Leukoencephalopathy
Cranial radiation, methotrexate
Cognition/intelligence
Cranial radiation, methotrexate
Pituitary dysfunction 
(growth hormone 
deficiency, 
panhypopituitarism)
Cranial radiation
Psychosocial
Stress, anxiety, death of peers; 
conditioned responses to 
chemotherapy
Thyroid dysfunction
Radiation
Osteonecrosis
Corticosteroids
 Decision-Making Algorithms
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Arthritis
Extremity Pain
Lymphadenopathy
Anemia
Bleeding
CHAPTER 155 
Leukemia
ETIOLOGY
The etiology of childhood leukemia is unknown and is thought 
to be multifactorial with both genetics and environmental factors 
contributing to malignant transformation. In chronic myeloid 
leukemia (CML) and, less commonly, in acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia (ALL), a translocation involving chromosomes 9 and 
22 (Philadelphia [Ph] chromosome) creates a novel fusion gene 
called BCR-ABL. This results in the production of a constitu-
tively activated tyrosine kinase that drives the development of 
CML and Ph-positive ALL. In addition, a number of genetic 
syndromes/diseases including Down syndrome (Trisomy 
21), Fanconi anemia, Bloom syndrome, ataxia-telangiectasia, 
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, neurofibromatosis type 1, and 
rare familial leukemia syndromes can predispose children to 
the development of acute leukemia. Siblings of children with 
leukemia are at an increased risk of developing leukemia with an 
approximately two- to fourfold risk above the general pediatric 
population (approximately 25% risk for monozygotic twins). 
Environmental factors that may increase the risk of leukemia 
include ionizing radiation and chemical exposures including 
certain chemotherapy agents (particularly the topoisomerase 
II inhibitors).
Signs and symptoms of acute leukemia are related to the 
infiltration of leukemic cells into normal tissues, resulting in 
either bone marrow failure (anemia, neutropenia, thrombocy-
topenia) and/or specific tissue infiltration (lymph nodes, liver, 
spleen, brain, bone, skin, gingiva, testes). Common presenting 
symptoms are fever, pallor, petechiae and/or ecchymoses, 
lethargy, malaise, anorexia, and bone/joint pain. Physical 
examination frequently reveals lymphadenopathy and hepato-
splenomegaly. The testes and central nervous system (CNS) 
are common extramedullary sites for ALL involvement; neu-
rological symptoms or a painless enlargement of one or both 
testes may be seen. Patients with T-cell ALL often have high 
white blood cell (WBC) counts, an anterior mediastinal mass 
(mediastinal adenopathy and/or thymic infiltration), cervical 
lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and CNS involvement. 
In patients with AML, extramedullary soft tissue tumors may 
be found in various sites.
LABORATORY AND IMAGING STUDIES
The diagnosis of acute leukemia is confirmed by findings of 
immature blast cells on the peripheral blood smear, bone 
marrow aspirate, or both. Most patients have abnormal blood 
counts; anemia and thrombocytopenia are common. The WBC 
count may be low, normal, or high; 15-20% of patients have a 

--- PAGE 626 ---
604
SECTION 21  Oncology
existing or subclinical CNS leukemia. Following induction 
therapy, patients undergo an end-of-induction bone marrow 
evaluation to assess for remission (nearly all patients with ALL 
achieve a remission). The intensity of postinduction therapy 
relies on risk adaptation using a variety of prognostic tools 
(cytogenetics, rapidity and depth of remission using tests for 
minimal residual disease [MRD], etc.). ALL patients with CNS 
involvement detected at diagnosis often require more intensive 
treatment that can include an escalation in their intrathecal 
therapy as well as the use of cranial radiation therapy. Recently, 
the omission of cranial radiation therapy for all pediatric 
leukemia patients holds great promise. Patients with ALL receive 
chemotherapy for a total of 2-3 years. The treatment of AML 
is divided into three general types including (1) acute promy-
elocytic leukemia with a t(15;17) translocation (PML-RARA) 
that relies heavily on all-trans retinoic acid and arsenic trioxide; 
(2) myeloid leukemias of Down syndrome in which less intensive 
therapy is administered, and (3) AML that parallels the risk 
and biological features most commonly seen in adult AML. 
The latter results in the need for intensive therapy and, in select 
high-risk patients, the use of stem cell transplantation after 
completing upfront intensive chemotherapy. The majority of 
pediatric patients with AML require four cycles of intensive 
cytarabine-based chemotherapy for low- and intermediate-risk 
patients and stem cell transplant for high-risk patients. Much 
like ALL, risk adaptive therapy is based on cytogenetics and 
response to therapy. Additionally, the availability of a human 
leukocyte antigen (HLA)-matched donor (ideally an HLA-
matched sibling) determines the use of stem cell transplantation 
in first remission. Unlike ALL, there is little evidence that 
low-dose continuation therapy is helpful in AML (with the 
exception of acute promyelocytic leukemia).
COMPLICATIONS
Major short-term complications associated with the treatment 
of leukemia result from bone marrow suppression caused by 
chemotherapy. Patients may have bleeding and significant anemia 
that necessitates transfusion of platelets and red blood cells. 
The development of neutropenia predisposes patients to a 
significant risk of both bacterial and fungal infections. Cell-
mediated immunosuppression increases the risk of Pneumocystis 
jiroveci (carinii) pneumonia; hence, prophylaxis, most commonly 
with oral trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, is recommended. 
Prophylaxis with antibiotics and antifungal agents is becoming 
more commonplace, particularly in patients with AML who 
are at high risk for treatment-related mortality (obese patients 
and adolescent/young adult patients). Long-term sequelae of 
therapy are less common than in previous treatment eras but 
continue to be a priority for prevention, recognition, and 
treatment. These sequelae include neurocognitive impairment, 
short stature, obesity, cardiac dysfunction, infertility, second 
malignant neoplasms, and psychosocial problems (Table 154.3).
PROGNOSIS
Patients with ALL are classified into prognostic risk groups 
(B-lineage ALL currently separates patients into low, average, 
high, and very high risk) based on age, initial WBC count, 
genetic characteristics (cytogenetics), extramedullary involve-
ment at diagnosis (testicular and/or CNS involvement), and 
response to induction therapy using MRD techniques. Risk 
WBC count of 50,000/mm3 or higher (hyperleukocytosis) at 
presentation. Definitive diagnosis requires the evaluation of 
cell surface markers (immunophenotype) by flow cytometry. 
Cytogenetic analysis should be undertaken in all cases of acute 
leukemia because many reoccurring cytogenetic abnormalities 
have prognostic implications and are used, in combination with 
other risk factors, to assign therapy to optimize outcome. In 
B-lineage ALL, the t(12;21) translocation (previously called TEL/
AML; now referred to as ETV6/RUNX1) is the most common 
(approximately 20% of all cases) and is associated with a favor-
able prognosis when combined with other low-risk features. The 
t(9;22) translocation occurs in 3% of cases and, historically, has a 
poor prognosis. However, much like in CML, the use of tyrosine 
kinase inhibitors in Ph-positive ALL has resulted in dramatic 
improvements in outcomes. The t(4;11) translocation (and other 
translocations involving the MLL gene on chromosome 11) 
often occurs in infant ALL and patients with secondary AML 
(often in patients that have been exposed to topoisomerase II 
inhibitors). It is associated with a poor prognosis. Fluorescent in 
situ hybridization or polymerase chain reaction techniques are 
now used in most cases of leukemia because many chromosomal 
abnormalities are not apparent on routine karyotypes. DNA 
microarray techniques are becoming an important diagnostic 
and prognostic tool. Recently, a new high-risk subgroup called 
Philadelphia-like ALL has been identified using this technique. 
A lumbar puncture should always be performed at the time 
of diagnosis to evaluate the possibility of CNS involvement. A 
chest x-ray should be obtained in all patients to assess for an 
anterior mediastinal mass. Electrolytes (particularly potassium, 
phosphorous, and calcium), uric acid, and renal and hepatic 
function should be monitored in all patients to assess and treat 
patients at risk for tumor lysis syndrome.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis of acute leukemia includes nonma-
lignant and malignant diseases. Infection is probably the most 
common mimicker of acute leukemia, particularly Epstein-Barr 
virus. Other infections (cytomegalovirus, other viruses, myco-
bacteria) may also produce signs and symptoms common to 
leukemia. Noninfectious considerations include aplastic anemia, 
histiocytosis, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, immune thrombo-
cytopenic purpura, and congenital or acquired conditions that 
result in neutropenia or anemia. Several malignant diagnoses 
including neuroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and Ewing 
sarcoma can also mimic leukemia. Newborns with trisomy 21 
may have a condition known as transient myeloproliferative 
disorder, which produces elevated WBC counts with peripheral 
blasts, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. It usually resolves with 
supportive care only, but these children have a significantly 
increased risk (30%) of developing acute leukemia (ALL or 
AML) within the next few months to years of life.
TREATMENT
Patients with B-lineage ALL generally receive three- or four-agent 
induction chemotherapy (patients with T-cell ALL receive a 
four-agent induction) based on their initial risk group assign-
ment. Standard-risk patients receive vincristine, corticosteroids, 
and pegylated asparaginase over 4 weeks; high-risk patients 
also receive an anthracycline (typically daunorubicin). Intrathe-
cal therapy with cytarabine or methotrexate is given to treat 

--- PAGE 627 ---
605
CHAPTER 156  Lymphoma
B-cell or T-cell origin; Table 156.1). Chromosomal transloca-
tions can result in unregulated/increased expression of an 
oncogene that drives malignant transformation. In Burkitt 
lymphoma, translocations occurring between chromosome 8 
(c-myc oncogene) and the immunoglobulin gene locus (found 
on chromosomes 2, 14, or 22) lead to overexpression of c-myc, 
causing malignant transformation.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The incidence of HL has a bimodal distribution with peaks in 
the adolescent/young adult years and again after age 50; it is 
rarely seen in children younger than 5 years of age. In children, 
boys are affected more commonly than girls; in adolescents, 
the gender ratio is approximately equal. The incidence of NHL 
increases with age. It is twice as common in whites as in African 
Americans and has a male predominance. NHL has been 
described in association with congenital or acquired immu-
nodeficiency states and after organ or stem cell transplantation. 
Burkitt lymphoma is commonly divided into two forms: a 
sporadic form, commonly seen in North America, and an 
endemic form, with a strong association with EBV and com-
monly seen in Africa.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
TABLE 155.1  General Prognostic Factors in Acute 
Lymphoblastic Leukemia
FACTOR
FAVORABLE 
(LOWER RISK)
UNFAVORABLE 
(HIGHER RISK)
Age
1-9.99 years
<1 or ≥10 years
Gender
Female
Male
Race and ethnicity
Caucasian, Asian/
Pacific Islanders
African American, 
Hispanic, Native 
American
Initial WBC count
<50,000/mm3
≥50,000/mm3
CNS disease at 
diagnosis
Absent
Present
Immunophenotype
B-lineage
T cell
Ploidy
Hyperdiploidy
Hypodiploidy
Genetics
t(12;21), trisomies 
of chromosomes 
4 and 10
t(4;11), t(9;22), 
Ph-like, iamp21
Minimal residual 
disease after 
remission induction
Negative
Positive
CNS, Central nervous system; WBC, white blood cell.
 Decision-Making Algorithms
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Lymphadenopathy
Neck Masses
Abdominal Pain
Fever
stratification factors are evolving (Table 155.1). The overall cure 
rate for childhood B-lineage ALL is approaching 90%. Relapse 
of ALL occurs most commonly in the bone marrow but can 
involve other extramedullary sites, such as the CNS or testicles. 
Relapse therapy relies on several treatment options based on 
the timing and location of relapse as well as the patient’s response 
to initial reinduction with chemotherapy. Thereafter a number 
of treatment options are employed including chemotherapy 
only, combination of chemotherapy with immunotherapy, 
immunotherapy alone, and stem cell transplantation. The current 
overall cure rate for childhood AML is approximately 65%. 
The prognosis for relapsed AML is poor, particularly in patients 
who have received a stem cell transplant.
CHAPTER 156 
Lymphoma
ETIOLOGY
Lymphomas are malignancies of lymphoid tissues and are 
the third most common malignancy in childhood, behind 
leukemias and central nervous system (CNS) tumors. There 
are two major types of lymphoma: Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) 
and non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). The etiologies are mul-
tifactorial. Both congenital and acquired immunodeficiencies 
are more commonly associated with NHL, whereas the 
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) has been associated with both HL 
and NHL.
Almost all cases of NHL in childhood are diffuse, highly 
malignant, and show little differentiation. NHL has three his-
tological subtypes: small noncleaved cell (Burkitt lymphoma), 
lymphoblastic, and large cell. For simplicity, these may be 
regarded as B cell, T cell, and large cell (which may be of 
The most common clinical presentation of HL is painless, firm 
lymphadenopathy often confined to one or two contiguous 
lymph node areas (most commonly the supraclavicular and 
cervical nodes). Mediastinal lymphadenopathy, which produces 
cough or shortness of breath, is a frequent presenting symptom. 
The presence of one of three B symptoms has prognostic value: 
fever (>38°C for 3 consecutive days), drenching night sweats, 
and unintentional weight loss of 10% or more within 6 months 
of diagnosis.
The sporadic (North American) form of Burkitt lymphoma 
more commonly has an abdominal presentation (typically with 
pain), whereas the endemic (African) form frequently presents 
with tumors of the jaw. The anterior mediastinum and cervical 
nodes are the usual primary sites for T-cell lymphomas. These 
lymphomas may cause airway or superior vena cava obstruction, 
pleural effusion, or both.
The diagnosis of lymphoma is established by biopsy of 
an involved lymph node. Systemic symptoms such as fever 
and weight loss may be present, particularly in patients with 
anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL), which can be insidious 
in onset. If the bone marrow contains 25% or greater blasts, the 
disease is classified as acute leukemia (either B-lineage acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia [ALL], T-cell ALL, or Burkitt leukemia). 
This distinction makes little prognostic or therapeutic difference 
as they all require aggressive, systemic therapy in addition to 
CNS-directed therapy.

--- PAGE 628 ---
606
SECTION 21  Oncology
have Stage II involvement at presentation (I 19%, II 49%, III 
19%, IV 13%), and about 39% will have B symptoms.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis for lymphomas in children includes 
leukemia, rhabdomyosarcoma, nasopharyngeal carcinoma, germ 
cell tumors, and thymomas. Nonmalignant diagnoses include 
infectious mononucleosis (EBV infection), branchial cleft and 
thyroglossal duct cysts, cat scratch disease (Bartonella henselae), 
bacterial or viral lymphadenitis, mycobacterial infection, 
toxoplasmosis, and even tinea capitis, all of which can produce 
significant lymphadenopathy that can mimic lymphoma. Patients 
with acute abdominal pain from Burkitt lymphoma may be 
misdiagnosed as having appendicitis.
TREATMENT
Pediatric HL is highly curable even with advanced disease; 
overall survival rates now exceed 90%. Risk-adaptive therapy 
using stage, the presence of bulky disease, the presence or 
absence of B symptoms, serum albumin, and the response to 
upfront chemotherapy has been employed to reduce the need 
for radiation therapy and excess chemotherapy. Multiagent 
chemotherapy usually consists of drugs such as doxorubicin, 
vincristine, bleomycin, vinblastine, etoposide, prednisone, and 
cyclophosphamide. In general, four to six courses of chemo-
therapy are given. The use of anti-CD30 monoclonal therapy 
(Brentuximab vedotin) and the elimination of bleomycin 
are currently under investigation in pediatric HL. Response 
to therapy is often assessed after two cycles of upfront che-
motherapy, relying on PET (to assess metabolic response) 
and computed tomography (CT; to assess bulk reduction) 
to determine the need for subsequent chemotherapy (slow 
response obligates more aggressive chemotherapy) and the 
need for radiation therapy. Of interest, patients with Stage 
I (single-node with complete resection) nodular lymphocyte 
predominant HL are cured with surgery alone 80% of the time.
Distant, noncontiguous metastases are common in child-
hood NHL. Systemic chemotherapy is mandatory and should 
be administered to all children with NHL, even those with 
clinically localized disease at diagnosis. B- and T-cell lym-
phoblastic lymphoma and ALCL are generally treated with 
aggressive multidrug regimens similar to the regimens used in 
ALL. Surgery and radiation therapy are not commonly used 
because the disease is rarely localized and is highly sensitive 
to chemotherapy. Burkitt lymphoma and diffuse large B-cell 
LABORATORY/IMAGING STUDIES
Patients suspected of having lymphoma should have a complete 
blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and measurement 
of serum electrolytes (particularly potassium, phosphorous, 
and calcium), lactate dehydrogenase, and uric acid as well 
as a chest x-ray to assess for a mediastinal mass (Fig. 156.1). 
The diagnosis ultimately requires a pathological confirmation 
from tissue or fluid sampling (pleural or peritoneal fluid). For 
staging purposes, a bone marrow evaluation, positron emis-
sion tomography (PET) and, less commonly, a bone scan are 
indicated to assess extent of disease (staging). The pathological 
hallmark of HL is the identification of Reed-Sternberg cells. 
Histopathological subtypes in childhood HL are the same as 
those reported in adults. Nodular sclerosis (NS) is the most 
common subtype in adolescents/young adults, whereas mixed 
cellularity subtypes and nodular lymphocyte predominant are 
more common in younger children. Staging of HL is according 
to the Ann Arbor system. About half of pediatric patients will 
TABLE 156.1  Subtypes of Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma in Children
HISTOLOGICAL 
CATEGORY
IMMUNOPHENOTYPE
USUAL PRIMARY SITE
MOST COMMON 
TRANSLOCATION(S)
Small noncleaved (Burkitt 
lymphoma)
Mature B-cell (surface 
immunoglobulin present)
Abdomen (sporadic form)
Head and neck (endemic form)
t(8;14)(q24;q32)
t(2;8)(p11;q24)
t(8;22)(q24;q11)
Lymphoblastic
T-cell (rarely pre-B-cell)
Neck and/or anterior 
mediastinum
Many
Large cell
T-cell, B-cell, or indeterminate
Lymph nodes, skin, soft tissue, 
bone
t(2;5)(p23;q35)
FIGURE 156.1  Chest x-ray of a 15-year-old boy demonstrating a 
large superior anterior mediastinal mass (large arrows) compressing 
the trachea and deviating it to the right (arrowheads). Biopsy revealed 
non-Hodgkin lymphoma. 

--- PAGE 629 ---
607
CHAPTER 157  Central Nervous System Tumors
Children with certain inherited syndromes, such as 
neurofibromatosis (types 1 and 2), Li-Fraumeni syndrome, 
tuberous sclerosis, Turcot syndrome, and von Hippel-Lindau 
syndrome, have an increased risk for developing a CNS tumor. 
However, most CNS tumors arise in children with no known 
underlying disorder or risk factor.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
 Decision-Making Algorithms
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Abnormal Head Size, Shape, and Fontanels
Visual Impairment and Leukocoria
Strabismus
Vomiting
Headaches
Ataxia
lymphomas are highly curable with cyclophosphamide, vincris-
tine, prednisolone, and doxorubicin. Much like HL treatment, 
monoclonal antibody therapy is being added to the traditional 
chemotherapy backbone in Burkitt lymphoma (anti-CD20) and 
in ALCL (anti-CD30).
COMPLICATIONS
The short-term complications from the treatment of lymphoma 
are similar to other pediatric malignancies and commonly 
include immunosuppression, related sequelae from myelosup-
pression, nausea, vomiting, and alopecia. Late adverse effects 
include second malignant neoplasms (acute myeloid leukemia 
or myelodysplasia, thyroid malignancies, and breast cancer), 
hypothyroidism, impaired soft tissue and bone growth, cardiac 
dysfunction, and pulmonary fibrosis.
PROGNOSIS
Children and adolescents with HL are classified as low, inter-
mediate, or high risk according to stage, nodal bulk, the presence 
of B symptoms, and the serum albumin at presentation. The 
prognosis is generally excellent with overall survival exceeding 
90% for most patients (approaching 100% for low-risk patients). 
The overall 3-year survival rates for B-cell, T-cell, and large 
cell NHL are 70-90%.
CHAPTER 157 
Central Nervous System Tumors
ETIOLOGY
Most central nervous system (CNS) tumors in children and 
adolescents are primary tumors that originate in the CNS and 
include gliomas (especially low-grade gliomas) and embryonic 
neoplasms (such as medulloblastoma and CNS primitive 
neuroectodermal tumors). In contrast, CNS tumors in adults 
are often high-grade astrocytomas or secondary tumors that 
are metastatic from other carcinomas. CNS tumors also may 
arise in patients previously treated with radiation therapy. CNS 
tumors are likely multifactorial in etiology. The classification 
of CNS tumors is complex and evolving, with the World 
Health Organization classification being the most complete 
and accurate system.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
CNS tumors are the most common solid tumors in children, 
second to leukemia in overall cancer incidence during childhood. 
However, due primarily to improved outcomes for leukemia, 
CNS tumors are now the leading cause of childhood cancer 
deaths. About 1,700 new cases occur each year in the United 
States; the rate is approximately 33 cases per 1 million children 
under 15 years of age. The incidence peaks before age 10 years 
and then decreases until a second peak after age 70. For medul-
loblastoma and ependymoma, males are more affected than 
females; for other tumor types, no gender differences exist. In 
the first 2-3 years of life, whites are affected more than nonwhite 
children; otherwise incidence rates are essentially equal for 
whites and nonwhite children.
Brain tumors can cause symptoms by impingement on normal 
tissue (usually cranial nerves) or by an increase in intracranial 
pressure caused either by obstruction of cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) flow or by a direct mass effect. Tumors that obstruct the 
flow of CSF quickly become symptomatic. Symptoms of 
increased intracranial pressure are lethargy, headache, and 
vomiting (particularly in the morning on awakening). Irritability, 
anorexia, poor school performance, and loss of developmental 
milestones all may be signs of slow-growing CNS tumors. In 
young children with open cranial sutures, an increase in head 
circumference may occur. Optic pathway tumors may lead to 
loss of visual acuity or visual field defects. Inability to abduct 
the eye as the result of sixth cranial nerve palsy is a common 
sign of increased intracranial pressure. Other cranial nerve 
deficits suggest involvement of the brainstem. Seizures occur 
in 20-50% of patients with supratentorial tumors; focal weakness 
or sensory changes also may be seen. Pituitary involvement 
can produce neuroendocrine effects such as precocious puberty 
or diabetes insipidus. Cerebellar tumors are associated with 
ataxia and diminished coordination. A history and physical 
examination are fundamental for evaluation and should include 
a careful neurological assessment, including visual fields and 
a funduscopic examination.
LABORATORY/IMAGING STUDIES
If an intracranial lesion is suspected, magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) is currently the examination of choice (Fig. 
157.1). Examination of CSF by cytocentrifuge histological testing 
is indicated to determine the presence of metastatic disease in 
primitive neuroectodermal tumors, germ cell tumors, and pineal 
region tumors. A lumbar puncture should not be performed 
before imaging has been obtained to evaluate for evidence 
of increased intracranial pressure. If a tumor is suspected 
to have metastatic potential (medulloblastoma), MRI of the 
entire spine should be obtained before surgery to assess for 
neuraxial dissemination. A postoperative MRI study of the 
brain should be obtained within 24-48 hours of surgery to 
assess the extent of resection. During follow-up, magnetic reso-
nance spectroscopy can help distinguish recurrent tumor from 
radiation necrosis.

--- PAGE 630 ---
608
SECTION 21  Oncology
TABLE 157.1  Location, Incidence, and Prognosis of 
Central Nervous System Tumors in Children
LOCATION
INCIDENCE 
(%)
5-YEAR 
SURVIVAL (%)
Infratentorial (posterior fossa)
50-60
Astrocytoma (cerebellum)
15
90
Medulloblastoma
15
50-80
Glioma (brainstem)
15
High grade: 0-5; 
low grade: 30
Ependymoma
5
50-60
Supratentorial (cerebral 
hemispheres)
35-45
Astrocytoma
20
50-75
Glioblastoma multiforme
10
0-5
Ependymoma
5
50-75
Choroid plexus papilloma
2
95
Midline
10-15
Craniopharyngioma
6
70-90
Germ cell tumors
3
65-95
Pineal
1
65-75
Optic nerve glioma
3
90
FIGURE 157.1  Magnetic resonance imaging scan of a 9-year-old 
boy showing a heterogeneously enhancing fourth ventricular mass 
(arrow). It was resected, and pathology revealed medulloblastoma. 
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis of a CNS mass lesion includes 
malignant tumor, benign tumor, arteriovenous malformation, 
aneurysm, brain abscess, cysticercosis, granulomatous disease 
(tuberculosis, sarcoid), intracranial hemorrhage, pseudotumor 
cerebri, vasculitis, and, rarely, metastatic tumor.
TREATMENT
The therapy for children with CNS tumors is individualized 
and depends on the tumor type, location, size, and associated 
symptoms. High-dose dexamethasone is often administered 
immediately to reduce tumor-associated edema. Surgical objec-
tives are complete excision, if possible, and maximal debulking 
if a complete excision is not possible. In children, radiation 
therapy is often combined with chemotherapy; in young children, 
radiation therapy may be delayed or avoided altogether. Proton 
radiation therapy is an emerging therapy that holds promise 
for decreased toxicity. Primitive neuroectodermal tumors 
(including medulloblastoma) and germ cell tumors are sensitive 
to chemotherapy; gliomas are less sensitive to chemotherapy. 
Chemotherapy plays an especially important role in infants in 
whom the effects of high-dose CNS radiation may have devastat-
ing effects on growth and neurocognitive development.
COMPLICATIONS
Short-term adverse effects of therapy include nausea, vomiting, 
anorexia, fatigue, immunosuppression, and cushingoid features. 
Long-term adverse effects include neurocognitive deficits, 
endocrinological sequelae, decreased bone growth, ototoxicity, 
renal insufficiency, cataracts, infertility, and second malignant 
neoplasms. The neurocognitive deficits can be significant, 
particularly in infants and young children, and are the primary 
reason for the continued search for the lowest efficacious 
radiation therapy dose and the most conformal delivery methods 
for the radiation therapy boosts. Posterior fossa syndrome 
(also known as “cerebellar mutism”) occurs in up to 25% of 
patients after resection of a posterior fossa tumor and is 
characterized by an acute decrease in speech, behavioral changes 
(e.g., irritability, apathy, or both), diffuse cerebellar dysfunction, 
and other neurological abnormalities. It may begin within hours 
to days of surgery and is usually self-resolving within weeks 
to months, although some neurological complications may 
persist. Somnolence syndrome, which is characterized by 
excessive fatigue and sleepiness, may occur in the months after 
completion of radiation therapy and is self-limited.
PROGNOSIS
Improvements in neurodiagnosis, neurosurgical techniques, 
chemotherapy regimens, and radiation therapy techniques 
have improved overall outcome. The 5-year overall survival 
rate associated with all childhood CNS tumors is approximately 
50-60%, resulting in large measure from the high curability of 
cerebellar astrocytomas and the increasing cure rate for patients 
with medulloblastoma (Table 157.1). Intrinsic brainstem gliomas 
and glioblastoma multiforme have extremely poor prognoses.
CHAPTER 158 
Neuroblastoma
ETIOLOGY
Neuroblastoma is derived from neural crest cells that form 
the adrenal medulla and the sympathetic nervous system. The 

--- PAGE 631 ---
609
CHAPTER 158  Neuroblastoma
chest, abdomen, and pelvis; a bone scan and/or metaiodoben-
zylguanidine scan; bilateral bone marrow aspiration and biopsies; 
and urinary catecholamines complete the evaluation.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The abdominal presentation of neuroblastoma must be dif-
ferentiated from Wilms tumor, which also presents as an 
abdominal or flank mass. Ultrasound or CT examination 
usually differentiates the tumors prior to surgery. Periorbital 
ecchymoses from orbital metastases can be mistaken for child 
abuse. Because children with bone marrow involvement may 
have anemia, thrombocytopenia, or neutropenia, leukemia is 
often considered in the differential.
TREATMENT
Treatment of neuroblastoma is based on risk classification (Table 
158.1), an evolving scheme based on emerging genetic discover-
ies, and treatment advances. Complete surgical excision is the 
initial treatment of choice for localized neuroblastoma. Children 
with very low– or low-risk tumors who undergo a gross total 
resection require no further therapy. Patients with intermediate-
risk disease are usually treated with surgery and 4-8 cycles of 
chemotherapy. In patients with high-risk disease, combination 
chemotherapy is given after confirmation of the diagnosis. The 
most commonly used agents are vincristine, cyclophosphamide, 
topotecan, doxorubicin, cisplatin, and etoposide. Resection of 
the primary tumor is undertaken after several courses of 
chemotherapy. Patients then undergo high-dose chemotherapy 
with autologous stem cell rescue; recent data suggest two 
courses of high-dose therapy are better than one. Radiation 
therapy is then administered to the primary tumor bed and 
areas of metastatic disease. Finally, cis-retinoic acid (isotreti-
noin) and Dinutuximab (a form of immunotherapy directed 
against the GD2 antigen) are administered to treat minimal 
residual disease.
COMPLICATIONS
Spinal cord compression from neuroblastoma may cause an 
irreversible neurological deficit and is an oncological emergency. 
Children with opsomyoclonus syndrome may suffer from 
developmental delay. The aggressive chemotherapy and radiation 
therapies currently used to treat high-risk neuroblastoma may 
result in complications such as ototoxicity, nephrotoxicity, 
growth problems, and second malignancies.
PROGNOSIS
The prognosis is affected by age at diagnosis, stage (based on 
presence or absence of metastasis and image-defined risk 
factors), DNA ploidy, MYCN status, 11q aberration, and his-
topathology (grade of tumor differentiation). Currently, children 
with neuroblastoma can be divided into four groups: very low, 
low, intermediate, and high risk. Patients with favorable biology 
tend to be younger and often have localized disease. Older 
patients with metastatic disease most commonly have unfavor-
able biology; approximately 50% will ultimately relapse due to 
drug-resistant residual disease. Although neuroblastoma 
represents only 8% of cases of childhood cancer, it is responsible 
for 15% of cancer deaths in children.
cause is unknown. Most cases occur in young children. Neu-
roblastoma may rarely (1-2% of cases) be hereditary. Mutations 
in the ALK, PHOX2B, and TP53 genes have been associated 
with familial cases. In sporadic cases, several somatic genetic 
mutations have been identified, with MYCN amplification being 
the most common.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Neuroblastoma is the most common extracranial solid tumor 
of childhood and the most common malignancy in infancy. 
The median age at diagnosis is 17 months. There are approxi-
mately 800 new cases of neuroblastoma in the United States 
each year. The prevalence is estimated to be 1 in 7,000 live 
births.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
 Decision-Making Algorithms
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Abdominal Masses
Neck Masses
Abnormal Eye Movements
Limp
Pancytopenia
Neuroblastoma is remarkable for its broad spectrum of clinical 
behavior ranging from spontaneous regression to rapid progres-
sion with metastases resulting in death. Children with localized 
disease are often asymptomatic at diagnosis, whereas children 
with metastases often appear ill and have systemic complaints 
such as fever, weight loss, and pain. The most common presenta-
tion is abdominal pain or mass. The mass is often palpated in 
the abdomen or flank and is hard and nontender. Approximately 
45% of tumors arise in the adrenal gland, and 25% arise in the 
retroperitoneal sympathetic ganglia. Other sites of origin are 
the paravertebral ganglia of the chest and neck. Paraspinal 
tumors may invade through the neural foramina and cause 
spinal cord compression. Horner syndrome is sometimes seen 
with neck or apical masses. Several paraneoplastic syndromes, 
including secretory diarrhea, profuse sweating, and opsomy-
oclonus, are associated with neuroblastoma.
Neuroblastoma may metastasize to multiple organs, including 
the liver, bone, bone marrow, and lymph nodes. Periorbital 
ecchymoses are a sign of orbital bone metastases. A unique 
category of neuroblastoma, stage MS, is defined in infants (<18 
months old) with metastases limited to skin, liver, or bone 
marrow. It is associated with a favorable outcome.
LABORATORY/IMAGING STUDIES
A complete blood count and plain radiographs may help identify 
patients with neuroblastoma. Calcification within abdominal 
neuroblastoma tumors is often observed on plain radiographs 
of the abdomen. About 90% of neuroblastomas produce cat-
echolamines (vanillylmandelic acid; homovanillic acid) that 
can be detected in the urine. Definitive diagnosis of neuro-
blastoma requires tissue biopsy for microscopic examination 
and genetic testing. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the 

--- PAGE 632 ---
610
SECTION 21  Oncology
TABLE 158.1  International Neuroblastoma Risk Group Pretreatment Classification Schema
INRG 
STAGE
AGE 
(MONTHS)
HISTOLOGICAL 
CATEGORY
GRADE OF TUMOR 
DIFFERENTIATION
MYCN
11q 
ABERRATION
PLOIDY
PRETREATMENT 
RISK GROUP
L1/L2
GN maturing, 
GNB 
intermixed
A (very low)
L1
Any, except 
GN maturing 
or
NA
B (very low)
GNB 
intermixed
Amplified
K (high)
L2
<18
Any, except 
GN maturing 
or
NA
No
D (low)
GNB 
intermixed
Yes
G (intermediate)
≥18
GNB nodular 
neuroblastoma
Differentiating
NA
No
E (low)
Yes
H (intermediate)
Poorly differentiated 
or undifferentiated
NA
H (intermediate)
Amplified
N (high)
M
<18
NA
Hyperdiploid
F (low)
<12
NA
Diploid
I (intermediate)
12-<18
NA
Diploid
J (intermediate)
<18
Amplified
O (high)
≥18
P (high)
MS
<18
NA
No
C (very low)
Yes
Q (high)
Amplified
R (high)
GN, Ganglioneuroma; GNB, ganglioneuroblastoma; INRG, International Neuroblastoma Risk Group; NA, not amplified.
Reprinted with permission. Copyright American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved. From Cohn SL, Pearson AD, London WB, et al. The International 
Neuroblastoma Risk Group (INRG) Classification System: An INRG Task Force Report. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27(2):289–297 (Fig 2).
CHAPTER 159 
Wilms Tumor
ETIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Wilms tumor is thought to arise from primitive, metanephric 
blastema, the precursor of a normal kidney. Nephrogenic 
rests are foci of embryonal cells that are rarely (<1%) found 
in normal infant kidneys but commonly (25-40%) found 
in Wilms tumor–bearing kidneys. Although the cause of 
Wilms tumor is unknown, approximately 15-20% of spo-
radic tumors have WT1 mutations or deletions. Over 70% 
of Wilms tumors demonstrate loss of imprinting or loss of 
heterozygosity at 11p15, leading to overexpression of IGF2, 
thought to play a key role in tumorigenesis. Certain syndromes 
including Beckwith-Wiedemann and WAGR (Wilms tumor, 
aniridia, genitourinary anomalies, and retardation; mutation 
involving 11p13 region) are at increased risk of developing 
the disease.
Wilms tumor is the most common malignant renal tumor 
of childhood, with approximately 500 new cases per year in the 
United States. Unilateral tumors have a median age of diagnosis 
of 44 months versus bilateral tumors, which have a median age 
of diagnosis of 31 months. Bilateral presentations are commonly 
associated with hereditary forms of the disease.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
 Decision-Making Algorithms
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Abdominal Pain
Abdominal Masses
Hematuria
Most children with Wilms tumor are brought to medical atten-
tion because they have an abdominal mass that is discovered 
by their parents. Although many children do not have complaints 
at the time that the mass is first noted, associated symptoms 
may include abdominal pain (often mistaken for constipation), 
fever, hypertension, and hematuria.

--- PAGE 633 ---
611
CHAPTER 160  Sarcomas
CHAPTER 160 
Sarcomas
Sarcomas are divided into soft tissue sarcomas and bone cancers. 
Soft tissue sarcomas arise primarily from the connective tissues 
of the body, such as muscle tissue, fibrous tissue, and adipose 
tissue. Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), the most common soft 
tissue sarcoma in children, is derived from mesenchymal cells 
of muscle lineage. Less common soft tissue sarcomas include 
fibrosarcoma, synovial sarcoma, and extraosseous Ewing 
sarcoma. The most common malignant bone cancers in children 
are osteosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma. Osteosarcomas derive 
from primitive bone-forming mesenchymal stem cells. Ewing 
sarcomas are thought to be of neural crest cell origin.
ETIOLOGY
The cause is unknown for most children diagnosed with sarcoma, 
although a few observations have been made regarding risks. 
Individuals with Li-Fraumeni syndrome (associated with a 
germline p53 mutation) and neurofibromatosis (associated with 
NF1 mutations) have an increased risk of soft tissue sarcomas. 
There is a 500-fold increased risk for osteosarcoma for individu-
als with hereditary retinoblastoma. Prior treatment for childhood 
cancer with radiation therapy or chemotherapy (specifically 
alkylating agents), or both, increases the risk for osteosarcoma 
as a second malignancy.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
In the United States, 850-900 children and adolescents under 
20 years of age are diagnosed with soft tissue sarcomas each 
year; approximately 350 are RMS. The incidence of RMS peaks 
in children 2-6 years old and again in adolescents. The early 
peak is associated with tumors in the genitourinary region, 
head, and neck; the later peak is associated with tumors in 
the extremities, trunk, and male genitourinary tract. Boys are 
affected 1.5 times more often than girls. Of the 650-700 U.S. 
children and adolescents under 20 years of age diagnosed 
with bone tumors each year, approximately two thirds have 
osteosarcoma and one third have Ewing sarcoma. Osteosarcoma 
most commonly affects adolescents; the peak incidence occurs 
during the period of maximum growth velocity. The incidence 
of Ewing sarcoma peaks between ages 10 and 20 years but may 
occur at any age. Ewing sarcoma primarily affects whites; it 
rarely occurs in African American children or Asian children.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
LABORATORY/IMAGING STUDIES
An abdominal ultrasound or computed tomography (CT) scan 
can usually distinguish an intrarenal mass from a mass arising 
from the adrenal gland (most commonly neuroblastoma) or 
other surrounding structures. Evaluation of the inferior vena 
cava is crucial because the tumor may extend from the kidney 
into the vena cava. The diagnostic work-up includes a complete 
blood count, urinalysis, liver and renal function studies, as well 
as a CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis to assess for 
metastatic involvement (pulmonary involvement is the most 
common metastatic site). The diagnosis is confirmed by his-
tological examination of the tumor.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis of Wilms tumor includes hydro-
nephrosis and polycystic disease of the kidney; benign renal 
tumors, such as mesoblastic nephroma and hamartoma; and 
other malignant tumors, such as neuroblastoma, renal cell 
carcinoma, lymphoma, and retroperitoneal rhabdomyosarcoma.
TREATMENT
The timing of nephrectomy for unilateral, resectable Wilms 
tumor remains divided between the North American approach 
and the European approach. Both approaches have a similar 
overall survival. The North American approach recommends 
an upfront nephrectomy (confirming tissue diagnosis) followed 
by adjuvant chemotherapy with or without radiation therapy, 
whereas the European approach is to make a diagnosis relying 
predominantly on imaging (sometimes a biopsy), provide 
upfront (neoadjuvant) chemotherapy, then nephrectomy of the 
involved kidney followed by adjuvant chemotherapy with or 
without radiation therapy. The Children’s Oncology Group 
(North American approach) relies on stage, histology (favorable 
versus anaplastic/unfavorable), patient age, tumor weight, loss 
of heterozygosity of 1p and 16q, and imaging response of 
pulmonary nodules after initial chemotherapy to risk stratify 
patients. Most patients will receive a 2-3 drug chemotherapy 
regimen (vincristine, actinomycin, with or without doxorubicin) 
as well as radiation therapy for those with high-risk features. 
Patients designated with very-low-risk unilateral Wilms tumor 
can often be cured with nephrectomy only.
Bilateral Wilms tumor is present in about 5% of children 
on initial presentation. The treatment goal for patients with 
bilateral Wilms tumor is to balance the need to achieve 
a cure while retaining as much normal kidney function as 
possible.
PROGNOSIS AND COMPLICATIONS
The overall survival rate for Wilms tumor is 90%. Unfor-
tunately, 25% of survivors will experience serious chronic 
health conditions. Survivors of Wilms tumor are at risk for 
cardiomyopathy, scoliosis, hypertension and prehypertension, 
renal and bladder insufficiency, pulmonary dysfunction, hepatic 
dysfunction, infertility, and second malignancies. Patients with 
bilateral Wilms tumor are sometimes left with renal insuf-
ficiency or failure. Female survivors may have complicated 
pregnancies and deliveries most commonly associated with 
flank radiation.
 Decision-Making Algorithms
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Extremity Pain
Limp
Neck Masses
Scrotal Swelling (Painless)
Vaginal Discharge
Lymphadenopathy

--- PAGE 634 ---
612
SECTION 21  Oncology
(MRI) before starting chemotherapy to determine surgical 
resection options. Osteosarcoma tends to metastasize to the 
lungs, most commonly, and rarely to other bones. Metastatic 
evaluation includes a chest CT scan and a bone scan (or 
PET scan).
The diagnosis of Ewing sarcoma is established with immu-
nohistochemical analysis along with cytogenetic and molecular 
diagnostic studies of the biopsy material. Ewing sarcoma is 
characterized by a specific chromosomal translocation, t(11;22), 
which is seen in 95% of tumors. MRI of the primary lesion 
should be performed to delineate extent of the lesion and any 
associated soft tissue mass. Metastatic evaluation involves a 
PET scan (when available), chest CT scan, and bilateral bone 
marrow aspiration/biopsy.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Patients with Ewing sarcoma may be misdiagnosed as having 
osteomyelitis; children with osteogenic sarcoma are often 
initially believed to have pain and swelling related to trauma. 
The differential diagnosis for RMS depends on the location of 
the tumor. Tumors of the trunk and extremities often present 
as a painless mass and may initially be thought to be benign 
tumors. Head and neck RMS may be misdiagnosed as aller-
gies, orbital cellulitis, or chronic infection of ears or sinuses. 
The differential diagnosis for intraabdominal RMS includes 
other abdominal malignancies, such as Wilms tumor and 
neuroblastoma.
TREATMENT
Treatment of RMS is currently based on a staging system that 
incorporates a number of diagnostic features including primary 
site, histological subtype, FOXO1 fusion status, stage (local, 
regional or metastatic involvement), and surgical grouping (the 
ability or inability to achieve a gross total resection prior to 
chemotherapy/radiation). The most common chemotherapy 
agents used in RMS are vincristine, dactinomycin, and cyclo-
phosphamide. Other active agents include irinotecan, ifosfamide, 
and etoposide. The use of temsirolimus, temozolomide, and 
ganitumab (anti-IGF-1R monoclonal antibody) is currently 
under investigation. Radiation is administered to the primary 
tumor when surgical resection is incomplete or would be morbid. 
It may also be administered to involved regional nodal sites, 
and sometimes to distant metastatic sites.
The current treatment of osteosarcoma involves neoadjuvant 
chemotherapy, surgical resection of the primary tumor, followed 
by adjuvant chemotherapy. The most common chemotherapy 
agents used for osteosarcoma are high-dose methotrexate, 
doxorubicin, and cisplatin. Radiation therapy is ineffective 
for osteosarcoma, although it is sometimes used for palliative 
intent to treat pain. The treatment for Ewing sarcoma is similar 
to osteosarcoma and requires neoadjuvant chemotherapy, local 
control measures, followed by adjuvant chemotherapy. The most 
common chemotherapy agents used for Ewing sarcoma are 
vincristine, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide in combination 
with ifosfamide and etoposide. The addition of topotecan in 
nonmetastatic patients and ganitumab in metastatic patients 
is currently under investigation. In contrast to osteosarcoma, 
Ewing sarcoma is radiation sensitive, and radiation therapy is 
administered to patients where the primary tumor cannot be 
safely resected as well as for metastatic sites.
The clinical presentation of RMS varies, depending on the site 
of origin, subsequent mass effect, and presence of metastatic 
disease. Periorbital swelling, proptosis, and limitation of extra-
ocular motion may be seen with an orbital tumor. Nasal mass, 
chronic otitis media, ear discharge, dysphagia, neck mass, and 
cranial nerve involvement may be noted with tumors in other 
head and neck sites. Urethral or vaginal masses, paratesticular 
swelling, hematuria, and urinary frequency or retention may 
be noted with tumors in the genitourinary tract. Trunk or 
extremity lesions tend to present as rapidly growing masses 
that may or may not be painful. If there is metastatic disease 
to bone or bone marrow, limb pain and evidence of marrow 
failure may be present.
Osteosarcoma is often located at the epiphysis or metaphysis 
of long bones that are associated with maximum growth velocity 
(distal femur, proximal tibia, proximal humerus), but any bone 
may be involved. It presents with pain and may be associated 
with a palpable mass. Because the pain and swelling often are 
initially thought to be related to trauma, radiographs of the 
affected region are frequently obtained; the radiographs usually 
reveal a lytic lesion, sometimes associated with calcification 
in the soft tissue surrounding the lesion. Although 75-80% of 
patients with osteosarcoma have apparently localized disease at 
diagnosis, most patients are believed to have micrometastatic 
disease as well.
Although Ewing sarcoma can occur in almost any bone in 
the body, the femur and pelvis are the most common sites. 
In addition to local pain and swelling, clinical manifestations 
may include constitutional symptoms such as fever, fatigue, 
and weight loss.
LABORATORY/IMAGING STUDIES
Tissue biopsy is needed for a definitive diagnosis of sarcoma. 
Selection of the biopsy site is important and has implications 
for future surgical resection and radiation therapy. Under light 
microscopy, RMS and Ewing sarcoma appear as small, round, 
blue cell tumors. Osteosarcomas are distinguishable by the 
presence of osteoid.
Immunohistochemical staining for muscle-specific proteins, 
such as actin and myosin, helps confirm the diagnosis of RMS. 
Two major histological variants exist for RMS: embryonal and 
alveolar. The embryonal (ERMS; embryonal RMS) histologi-
cal variant is most common in younger children with head, 
neck, and genitourinary primary tumors. The alveolar (ARMS; 
alveolar RMS) histological variant occurs in older patients and 
is seen most commonly in trunk and extremity tumors. Alveolar 
RMS is often characterized by specific translocations: t(2;13) or 
t(1;13). Although histology is still used to determine risk group 
assignment/treatment, FOXO1 fusion status is more predictive 
of outcome. The vast majority of ARMS are PAX3-FOXO1 or 
PAX7-FOXO1 translocation positive. Metastatic evaluation for 
patients with RMS should include positron emission tomography 
(PET) scan (when available), chest computed tomography 
(CT), and bilateral bone marrow aspiration/biopsy. A lumbar 
puncture is required in patients with a parameningeal primary 
site due to the risk of direct extension into the central nervous 
system (CNS).
The diagnosis of osteosarcoma is established with the 
presence of osteoid and immunohistochemical analysis of 
the biopsy material. The extent of the primary tumor should 
be delineated carefully with magnetic resonance imaging 

--- PAGE 635 ---
613
CHAPTER 160  Sarcomas
tumor necrosis after neoadjuvant chemotherapy have an overall 
survival rate of approximately 80% versus approximately 50% 
for patients who have <90% tumor necrosis. The overall cure 
rate for patients with localized osteosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma 
is approximately 60-70%. Patients who have lung metastasis 
at diagnosis have a cure rate of approximately 30%. Patients 
with metastases to other bones have a very poor prognosis 
(less than 20%).
Suggested Readings
Adamson PC. Improving the outcome for children with cancer: 
development of targeted new agents. CA Cancer J Clin. 2015;65: 
212–220.
Allen CE, Kelly KM, Bollard CM. Pediatric lymphomas and histiocytic 
disorders of childhood. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2015;62:139–165.
Chintagumpala M, Gajjar A. Brain tumors. Pediatr Clin North Am. 
2015;62:167–178.
Cooper SL, Brown PA. Treatment of pediatric acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2015;62:61–73.
HaDuong JH, Martin AA, Skapek SX, et al. Sarcomas. Pediatr Clin North 
Am. 2015;62:179–200.
Malkan AD, Loh A, Bahrami A, et al. An approach to renal masses in 
pediatrics. Pediatrics. 2015;135:142–158.
Pinto NR, Applebaum MA, Volchenboum SL, et al. Advances in risk 
classification and treatment strategies for neuroblastoma. J Clin Oncol. 
2015;33:3008–3017.
COMPLICATIONS
In addition to potential late effects from the chemotherapy, 
children with sarcomas may have complications related to 
local control of the tumor. If the local disease is controlled 
with surgery, the long-term sequelae may include loss of limb 
or limitation of function. If local control is accomplished 
with radiation therapy, the late effects depend on the dose 
of radiation given, the extent of the radiated site, and the 
development of the child at the time of radiation therapy. 
Irradiating tissues interferes with growth and development, 
causes organ damage, and increases the risk of second malignant 
neoplasms.
PROGNOSIS
For all children with sarcoma, presence or absence of metastatic 
disease at presentation is the most important prognostic factor. 
The outlook remains poor for patients who have distant metas-
tases from Ewing sarcoma, RMS, or osteosarcoma. Patients with 
localized RMSs in favorable sites have an excellent prognosis 
when treated with surgery followed by chemotherapy. In patients 
with osteosarcoma, the amount of tumor necrosis after preopera-
tive chemotherapy is prognostic. Patients who achieve >90% 
PEARLS FOR PRACTITIONERS
CHAPTER 153
Oncology Assessment
•	 The most common cancers in children and adolescents are 
leukemia, brain tumors, and lymphoma followed by sarcomas 
of soft tissue and bone.
•	 Cancers that are seen almost exclusively in children, as 
opposed to adolescents and adults, include neuroblastoma, 
Wilms tumor, retinoblastoma, and hepatoblastoma.
•	 Many signs and symptoms of childhood cancer are non-
specific. Pain, fatigue, pallor, bruising/petechiae/bleeding, 
and a growing mass are all common on presentation.
•	 In general, malignant lymph nodes tend to be large, firm, 
fixed, and nontender; reactive lymph nodes tend to be small, 
soft, mobile, and tender.
•	 Almost all cancers require a biopsy of some type to make 
a definitive diagnosis.
•	 A child with an abdominal mass should prompt consideration 
for neuroblastoma, Wilms tumor, and hepatoblastoma.
•	 In general, toddlers and older children with neuroblastoma 
are ill, whereas children with Wilms tumor have few 
associated symptoms.
•	 Serum (and/or cerebrospinal fluid) alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) 
and beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-HCG) are tumor 
markers for germ cell tumors. AFP is a tumor marker for 
hepatoblastoma.
•	 Urine homovanillic acid (HVA) and vanillylmandelic acid 
(VMA) are tumor markers for neuroblastoma.
•	 The prognosis for children with cancer has improved dramati-
cally in the past 60 years, with long-term survival improving 
from about 20% to 80%.
•	 Prognostic factors include age, histology, and the presence 
or absence of metastases. However, genetic factors (of both 
the cancer and the patient) and response to initial therapy 
are becoming more powerful determinants of survival.
CHAPTER 154
Principles of Cancer Treatment
•	 Treatment for children with cancer is usually multimodal 
and may involve surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, 
and immunotherapy. Targeted therapies and immuno-
therapies are more commonly being used to treat pedi-
atric cancers, often with dramatic results and manageable 
toxicities.
•	 Current primary prevention strategies for pediatric malig-
nancy are uncommon but include use of the hepatitis B 
vaccine (hepatocellular carcinoma) and human papilloma-
virus vaccine (GU/oropharyngeal cancers).
•	 Adverse effects of treatment may lead to oncological 
emergencies.
•	 Tumor lysis syndrome may be seen in patients with 
leukemia and lymphoma. It is best treated with hydration, 
allopurinol and/or rasburicase (to treat hyperuricemia), 
and treating the underlying cancer.
