
--- PAGE 636 ---
614
SECTION 21  Oncology
•	 Airway compression, spinal cord compression, and 
infection are other oncological emergencies.
•	 Many survivors of childhood cancer suffer from long-term 
side effects from the treatment.
•	 As the prognosis for childhood cancer improves, clinical 
trials are shifting focus from improving survival to 
decreasing long-term side effects.
CHAPTER 155
Leukemia
•	 Children with cytopenias and/or leukocytosis should be 
considered for bone marrow aspiration to assess for acute 
leukemia.
•	 Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) accounts for approxi-
mately 75% of pediatric leukemia; acute myeloid leukemia 
(AML) accounts for approximately 20% and chronic myeloid 
leukemia (CML) accounts for less than 5%.
•	 ALL is more common in whites, whereas AML has a 
slightly higher incidence in Hispanic and African Ameri-
can children.
•	 ALL is classified as B-cell or T-cell.
•	 The incidence of B-cell ALL peaks at 2-5 years of age 
with a slight male predominance. T-cell ALL has a male 
predominance and presents at an older age.
•	 The diagnosis of acute leukemia is confirmed by findings 
of immature blast cells on a peripheral blood smear or bone 
marrow aspirate.
•	 Cytogenetic analysis should be undertaken because cyto-
genetic abnormalities have prognostic indications and can 
be used to tailor treatment.
•	 Unlike adults, children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia 
generally have an excellent prognosis (90% survival). Children 
with acute myeloid leukemia have a more guarded prognosis 
(65% survival).
CHAPTER 156
Lymphoma
•	 Lymphomas are the third most common pediatric malig-
nancy (following leukemia and central nervous system 
tumors).
•	 Hodgkin lymphoma peaks in the adolescent/young adult 
years (and again after age 50). It most commonly presents 
as painless, firm lymphadenopathy. Diagnosis is established 
by biopsy of an involved lymph node. It is highly curable, 
even with advanced disease.
•	 Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) incidence increases with 
age, is more common in whites, and has a male predomi-
nance. Distant, noncontiguous metastases are common in 
childhood NHL. Systemic chemotherapy is mandatory.
CHAPTER 157
Central Nervous System Tumors
•	 Most central nervous system (CNS) tumors in children and 
adolescents are primary tumors that originate in the CNS 
and include low-grade astrocytomas or embryonic neoplasms 
(such as medulloblastoma and CNS primitive neuroecto-
dermal tumors).
•	 CNS tumors are the most common solid tumor in child-
hood and are now the leading cause of childhood cancer 
deaths.
•	 Lethargy, headache, ataxia, and morning vomiting are 
common presenting symptoms of brain tumors; these 
symptoms should prompt consideration for imaging the 
brain (computed tomography [CT] and/or magnetic reso-
nance imaging [MRI]).
•	 Treatment is individualized and may include surgery, 
chemotherapy, and/or radiation therapy. Radiation therapy 
is often delayed or avoided in young children.
•	 The 5-year survival is improving. It is now 50-60%, resulting, 
in large part, because of the curability of cerebellar astro-
cytomas and the increasing cure rate for medulloblastoma.
CHAPTER 158
Neuroblastoma
•	 Neuroblastoma is the most common malignancy in 
infancy.
•	 Compared with toddlers and older children, infants with 
neuroblastoma are generally well, have less aggressive 
disease, and an excellent prognosis.
•	 The most common presentation of neuroblastoma is an 
abdominal mass or pain.
•	 Children with high-risk neuroblastoma have a guarded 
prognosis, even with aggressive treatment including che-
motherapy, surgery, radiation therapy, retinoid acid, and 
immunotherapy.
CHAPTER 159
Wilms Tumor
•	 Wilms tumor is thought to arise from primitive, metanephric 
blastema.
•	 Over 70% of Wilms tumors demonstrate loss of imprinting 
or loss of heterozygosity at 11p15.
•	 The most common presentation is an abdominal mass.
•	 Treatment of Wilms tumor is nephrectomy and chemotherapy 
with or without radiation therapy.
•	 The overall survival rate is 90%, although 25% of survivors 
experience chronic health problems.

--- PAGE 637 ---
615
CHAPTER 160  Sarcomas
CHAPTER 160
Sarcomas
•	 There are two types of sarcomas: soft tissue sarcomas 
(rhabdomyosarcoma) or bone cancers (osteosarcoma, Ewing 
sarcoma).
•	 Sarcomas originating in the bone, such as osteosarcoma and 
Ewing sarcoma, usually present with a mass and/or pain.
•	 Prognostic factors for patients with sarcomas include the 
presence or absence of metastases, the extent of surgical 
resection, and the response to chemotherapy (usually 
measured by the amount of tumor necrosis).
•	 Survival in patients with localized rhabdomyosarcoma 
is excellent following surgery and chemotherapy.
•	 Patients with osteosarcoma with >90% tumor necrosis 
following chemotherapy have a >80% survival rate (50% 
survival if <90% tumor necrosis).
•	 Overall survival for localized osteosarcoma or Ewing 
sarcoma is 60-70%.
•	 Survival with lung metastases is ~30%.
•	 Survival with metastases to other bones is <20%.

--- PAGE 638 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- PAGE 639 ---
617
SECTION 22 
NEPHROLOGY AND UROLOGY
Hiren P. Patel  |  John D. Mahan
CHAPTER 161 
Nephrology and Urology 
Assessment
The kidneys preserve homeostasis through (1) maintaining 
fluid and electrolyte balance; (2) excreting metabolic waste 
products through glomerular filtration and tubular secretion; 
(3) generating energy (gluconeogenesis); and (4) producing 
important endocrine hormones (renin, vitamin D metabolites, 
erythropoietin). Renal disorders, by disturbing homeostasis, 
can affect growth and development and cause a variety of clinical 
manifestations (Table 161.1). Renal disorders in children may 
be intrinsic renal diseases or derive from systemic conditions 
(Table 161.2).
HISTORY
Fetal urine production contributes to amniotic fluid volume, 
lung maturation, and somatic development. Congenital renal 
disorders may be associated with reduced (oligohydramnios) 
or increased amniotic fluid volume (polyhydramnios). Pulmo-
nary hypoplasia and fetal maldevelopment of the face and 
extremities may result from insufficient amniotic fluid (Potter 
syndrome; see Chapters 58 and 60).
Risk factors for renal disease (e.g., perinatal hypoxia-ischemia, 
acute tubular necrosis, renal vein thrombosis) can often be 
detected by a careful history. A detailed family history may 
identify hereditary renal conditions. Poor growth and/or feeding 
and abnormal fluid intake and/or output may indicate underlying 
renal dysfunction. Common manifestations of renal and urinary 
tract disorders are listed in Table 161.1.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Renal diseases in children may be initially asymptomatic and 
detected during routine visits. Abnormal growth, hypertension 
(HTN), dehydration, or edema may suggest underlying renal 
disease (see Chapter 33). Abnormal facial features may suggest 
syndromes associated with renal disorders (fetal alcohol syn-
drome, Down syndrome). Preauricular tags, external ear 
deformities, or ophthalmological abnormalities (keratoconus, 
aniridia, iridocyclitis, cataracts) can be associated with congenital 
renal defects. Abdominal examination may reveal renal masses 
or bladder distention due to urine-concentrating defect or 
urinary tract obstruction.
RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
Normal renal function depends on intact glomerular filtration 
and tubular function (proximal tubule [PT], loop of Henle, 
and distal tubule [DT]) to produce urine (Fig. 161.1). Net 
glomerular pressure favors movement of fluid out of glomerular 
capillaries into Bowman’s space. Intraglomerular pressure is 
regulated by afferent and, particularly, efferent arteriolar tone. 
Renin is generated by cells in the juxtaglomerular apparatus, 
located at the base of each glomerulus near the afferent/efferent 
arterioles and DT of that nephron. Renin is released in response 
to glomerular flow and perfusion.
The PT conducts isosmotic reabsorption (see Fig. 161.1) to 
reclaim two thirds of filtered volume, sodium, and chloride. 
Glucose, amino acids, potassium, and phosphate are almost 
completely reabsorbed. Approximately 75% of filtered bicar-
bonate is reabsorbed in the PT. When filtered bicarbonate 
exceeds the PT threshold, it is spilled into the urine. The PT 
also secretes compounds such as organic acids, penicillins, and 
other drugs. The most potent vitamin D analog—1,25(OH)2-
cholecalciferol (calcitriol)—is produced by PT cells in response 
to parathyroid hormone and intracellular calcium/phosphorus 
concentrations.
The loop of Henle is the site of reabsorption of 25% of 
filtered sodium chloride (see Fig. 161.1). Active chloride 
transport drives the countercurrent multiplier and constructs 
the medullary interstitial hypertonic gradient required for 
urinary concentration.
The DT is composed of the distal convoluted tubule (DCT) 
and collecting ducts (CD). The DCT is water impermeable 
and contributes to urine dilution by active sodium chloride 
absorption. The CD is the primary site of antidiuretic hormone 
(vasopressin) response, which leads to urine concentration. 
Sodium-potassium and sodium-hydrogen exchange in the CD 
is regulated by aldosterone. Active hydrogen ion secretion, 
responsible for final acidification of the urine, also occurs in 
the CD.
Renal ammonia production and intraluminal generation 
of ammonium (NH4
+) facilitate urine hydrogen ion excretion. 
Urinary NH4
+ is not easily measured but can be inferred by 
calculation of the urinary anion gap. The gap between measured 
anions and cations largely consists of NH4
+. Problems with renal 
acid excretion or ammonia production decrease the urinary 
anion gap. A urinary gap of approximately 1 mEq/kg body 
weight is typical in normal children.
Maximum urinary concentrating capacity in a preterm 
newborn (~400 mOsm/L) is less than in a full-term newborn 
(600-800 mOsm/L), which is less than in older children and 

--- PAGE 640 ---
618
SECTION 22  Nephrology and Urology
adults (~1,200 mOsm/L). Neonates can dilute urine similar 
to adults (75-90 mOsm/L), but because glomerular filtration 
rate (GFR) is lower, the capacity to excrete a water load is 
less in infants. GFR reaches adult levels by 1-2 years of age. 
Tubular reabsorption of sodium, potassium, bicarbonate, and 
phosphate and excretion of hydrogen are all reduced in infants 
relative to adults. These functions mature independently and 
at different ages, so a neonate rapidly develops the ability to 
reabsorb sodium efficiently, but it takes 2 years for bicar-
bonate reabsorption to mature. Erythropoietin is secreted 
by interstitial cells in the renal medulla in response to low 
oxygen delivery and helps regulate bone marrow red blood cell 
production.
COMMON MANIFESTATIONS
TABLE 161.1  Common Manifestations of Renal Disease by Age
FINDING
SIGNIFICANCE
NEONATE
Flank mass
Multicystic dysplasia, UT obstruction (hydronephrosis), polycystic disease, tumor
Hematuria
UTI, acute tubular/cortical necrosis, UT malformation, trauma, renal vein thrombosis
Anuria and oliguria
Renal agenesis, obstruction, acute tubular necrosis, vascular thrombosis
CHILD/ADOLESCENT
Cola red-colored urine
Hemoglobinuria (hemolysis), myoglobinuria (rhabdomyolysis), pigmenturia (porphyria, urate, beets, 
drugs), hematuria (UTI, GN, Henoch-Schönlein purpura, hypercalciuria, stones)
Gross hematuria
UTI, GN, trauma, benign hematuria, nephrolithiasis, tumor
Edema
Nephrotic syndrome, GN, acute/chronic renal failure, cardiac/liver disease
Hypertension
Acute GN, acute/chronic renal failure, obstruction, cysts, dysplasia, coarctation of the aorta, renal 
artery stenosis
Polyuria
Diabetes mellitus, central and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, obstruction, dysplasia, hypokalemia, 
hypercalcemia, psychogenic polydipsia, sickle disease/trait, polyuric renal failure, diuretic abuse
Oliguria
Dehydration, acute tubular necrosis, acute GN, interstitial nephritis, hemolytic uremic syndrome
Dysfunctional voiding/urgency
Neurogenic bladder, UTI, vaginitis, hypercalciuria, foreign body
GN, Glomerulonephritis; UT, Urinary tract; UTI, urinary tract infection.
TABLE 161.2  Primary and Systemic Causes of Renal 
Disease in Children
PRIMARY
SECONDARY (SYSTEMIC)
Minimal change 
nephrotic syndrome
Postinfectious glomerulonephritis
Focal segmental 
glomerulosclerosis
IgA nephropathy
Membranoproliferative 
glomerulonephritis
Henoch-Schönlein purpura-related 
nephritis
Membranoproliferative 
glomerulonephritis (related to chronic 
infection, liver disease)
Membranous 
nephropathy
Hemolytic uremic syndrome
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis and 
other vasculitides
Congenital nephrotic 
syndrome
Tubular toxins
Alport syndrome
Antibiotics
Intrinsic tubular disorders
Chemotherapeutic agents
Structural renal disorders
Hemoglobin/myoglobin
Congenital urinary tract 
abnormalities
Tubular disorders
Polycystic kidney disease
Cystinosis, oxalosis
Renal/urinary tract tumor
Galactosemia, hereditary fructose 
intolerance
Stones
Sickle disease/trait
Trauma
Extrarenal malignancy (leukemia, 
lymphoma)
Ig, Immunoglobulin.
 Decision-Making Algorithms
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Dysuria
Enuresis
Red Urine and Hematuria
Renal disorders can be classified as primary or secondary (due 
to systemic illnesses; see Table 161.2). Renal diseases may present 
with obvious signs (hematuria or edema), or with subtle signs 
detected on screening examinations (abdominal or flank mass, 
HTN, proteinuria). Fever, irritability, and vomiting may be 
presenting symptoms in neonates and infants with urinary 
tract infections (UTIs), whereas frequency and dysuria suggest 
UTI in older children. Chronic kidney disease is often associated 
with poor growth and feeding, but may be initially detected 
on screening examinations (HTN, hematuria). An abnormal 
urine stream may indicate posterior urethral valves other 
obstructive lesions or bladder disorders.

--- PAGE 641 ---
619
CHAPTER 161  Nephrology and Urology Assessment
breakdown. The correlation between creatinine and GFR can 
be used to estimate GFR. The revised Schwartz formula is the 
following:
GFR
Ht
Crserum
=
×
0 413
.
(height in cm; serum creatinine in mg/dL). This formula is 
most useful when body habitus and muscle mass are reason-
ably normal and when renal function is relatively stable. This 
formula is most accurate in GFR range of 15-75 mL/min per 
1.73 m2. Values greater than 75 are typically reported as greater 
than 75 rather than as a specific number. Creatinine clearance 
([UCr]V/[PCr]) estimates GFR, but overestimates GFR when renal 
function is decreased.
Urinalysis is a useful screen for renal abnormalities. In addi-
tion to urine color and turbidity, macroscopic urinalysis uses 
a urine dipstick for pH and the presence of protein, glucose, 
ketones, blood, and leukocytes. Dilute urine may result in a 
false-negative result for protein; false-positive results may occur 
with extremely alkaline or concentrated urine or if there is a 
delay in reading the test. Dipsticks are exquisitely sensitive to 
presence of hemoglobin (or myoglobin); there are few false-
negative test results but many false-positive results. Glucose is 
detected via glucose oxidase-peroxidase reaction, and leukocytes 
are detected via leukocyte esterase reaction. The nitrite test 
may detect bacteriuria if the bacteria can reduce nitrate to nitrite 
DIAGNOSTIC STUDIES
Laboratory Studies
GFR is measured most accurately by infusion of a substance 
that is freely filtered by the glomerulus but not metabolized, 
reabsorbed, or secreted in or by the tubules. GFR is calculated 
as follows:
GFR
U V P
= [ ]
[ ]
where [U] is urine concentration, [P] is serum concentration 
of a substance (mg/dL) used to measure clearance, and V is 
urine flow rate (mL/min).
By convention, GFR is corrected to body surface area of 
1.73 m2 to allow comparison between different-sized individuals. 
In a full-term newborn, an uncorrected GFR of 4-5 mL/min 
corrects to approximately 40 mL/min per 1.73 m2. GFR increases 
rapidly during the first 2 years of life until it achieves adult 
values (100-120 mL/min per 1.73 m2). After that, GFR and 
body size increase proportionately, so GFR/1.73 m2 remains 
stable.
Plasma creatinine reflects muscle mass, increases with age, 
and is used to approximate GFR. Creatinine is also secreted 
by the PT, resulting in less accurate measurement of GFR 
with immature kidneys or with decreased renal function. 
Blood urea nitrogen is affected by renal function, but is 
also affected by hydration, nutrition, catabolism, and tissue 
Na+
H+
H+
HCO3– H2O
Glu Na+ Cl–
(Vasa recta)
SEGMENTAL NEPHRON FUNCTION
Ca++
Ca++
Na+
K+
H+
NaCl  
ADH +  ADH –
Ca++
Ca++
K+
Cl–
Na+
H2O
H2O
H2O
H2O
OA  
NaCl  
NaCl  
1200
1200
600
300
300
50
50
50
600
50
1200
50
300
600
200
100
300
CORTEX
MEDULLA
PAPILLA
LOOP OF HENLE
FIGURE 161.1  Major transport functions of each nephron segment, including representative osmolalities 
in vasa recta, interstitium, and tubule at different levels within the kidney. ADH, Antidiuretic hormone; 
Glu, glucose; OA, organic acid. (From Andreoli TE, Carpenter CCJ, Plum F, et al., ed. Cecil Essentials 
of Medicine. Philadelphia: WB Saunders;1986.)

--- PAGE 642 ---
620
SECTION 22  Nephrology and Urology
compartments and plasma volume contraction. Renal blood flow 
and glomerular filtration rate are not usually diminished. Edema 
results from reduction in effective circulating blood volume and 
increase in tubular sodium chloride reabsorption secondary 
to activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. 
Hypoproteinemia stimulates hepatic lipoprotein synthesis and 
diminishes lipoprotein metabolism, leading to elevated serum 
lipids (cholesterol, triglycerides) and lipoproteins.
NS may be primary or secondary (Table 162.1). A child with 
apparent primary NS, prior to renal biopsy, is considered to have 
idiopathic nephrotic syndrome. Minimal change nephrotic 
syndrome (MCNS) is the most common histological form of 
primary NS in children. More than 80% of children less than 7 
years of age with NS have MCNS. Children 7-16 years old with 
NS have a ~50% chance of having MCNS. Males are affected 
more frequently than females (2 : 1).
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) accounts for 
~10-20% of children with primary NS. It may present like MCNS 
or with less impressive proteinuria. FSGS may develop from 
MCNS or represent a separate entity. A circulating factor that 
increases glomerular permeability is found in some patients 
with FSGS. More than 35% of children with FSGS progress 
to renal failure.
Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (MPGN) is 
characterized by hypocomplementemia with signs of glomerular 
renal disease. MPGN represents 5-15% of children with primary 
NS, is typically persistent, and has a high likelihood of progres-
sion to renal failure over time.
Membranous nephropathy represents <5% of children 
with primary NS. It is seen most commonly in adolescents 
and children with systemic infections (hepatitis B, syphilis, 
malaria, and toxoplasmosis) or specific medications (gold, 
penicillamine).
Congenital NS presents during the first 2 months of life. 
There are two common types. The Finnish type is an autosomal 
recessive disorder most common in persons of Scandinavian 
descent and is due to a mutation in the nephrin protein 
component in the glomerular filtration slit. The second type 
is a heterogeneous group of abnormalities, including diffuse 
mesangial sclerosis and conditions associated with drugs or 
and have sufficient urine contact time. False-negative results 
occur with frequent voiding, low urine bacterial count, urinary 
tract obstruction, and infection with bacteria unable to generate 
nitrite. Gross hematuria or prolonged contact (uncircumcised 
boys) may result in a false-positive nitrite test. Microscopic 
urinalysis is used to confirm pyuria and hematuria and detect 
casts and crystals.
Proteinuria can be further defined by a spot urine protein/
creatinine (UPr/Cr) in a single urine specimen. This unit-less value 
correlates very well with 24-hour urine protein excretion: spot 
UPr/Cr approximates 24-hour urine protein/m2 per day (normal 
<0.20; nephrotic range >2.0 in children).
IMAGING STUDIES
Ultrasound reliably assesses kidney size, determines degree of 
dilation, and differentiates cortex and medulla. The bladder 
also can be visualized. Pulsed Doppler studies assess arterial 
and venous blood flow and can provide the vascular resistive 
index in each kidney.
A voiding cystourethrogram involves filling of the bladder 
to detect vesicoureteral reflux and to evaluate the urethra. 
Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging 
have mostly replaced the intravenous pyelogram to evaluate 
kidney structure and function. Radionuclide studies can define 
renal size, scars, and renal function/excretion.
CHAPTER 162 
Nephrotic Syndrome  
and Proteinuria
ETIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Small amounts of protein are found in urine of healthy children 
(<4 mg/m2 per hour or UPr/Cr <0.2). Nephrotic proteinuria in 
children is defined as protein >40 mg/m2 per hour or U Pr/Cr 
>2.0. Proteinuria between these levels is mildly to moderately 
elevated but not nephrotic.
Proteinuria may be transient or persistent, asymptomatic 
or symptomatic, and orthostatic (present in the upright posi-
tion but not in the recumbent position) or fixed (present in 
all positions). Proteinuria may be glomerular (disruptions of 
the normal glomerular barrier to protein filtration) or tubular 
(increased filtration, impaired reabsorption, or secretion of 
proteins).
Nephrotic syndrome (NS) is characterized by persistent 
heavy proteinuria (mainly albuminuria; >2 g/m2 per 24 hour); 
hypoproteinemia (serum albumin <3.0 g/dL); hypercholester-
olemia (>250 mg/dL); and edema. Age, race, and geography 
affect the incidence of NS. Certain human leukocyte antigen 
(HLA) types (HLA-DR7, HLA-B8, and HLA-B12) are associated 
with increased incidence of NS. Increased glomerular perme-
ability is due to alterations in the normal glomerular cellular 
and basement membrane barrier that restrict serum protein 
filtration. The resultant massive proteinuria leads to decreased 
serum proteins, especially albumin. Plasma oncotic pressure is 
diminished, leading to fluid shifts from vascular to interstitial 
TABLE 162.1  Primary and Secondary Forms of  
Nephrotic Syndrome
PRIMARY
SECONDARY
Minimal change nephrotic 
syndrome
Primary focal 
glomerulosclerosis
Membranoproliferative 
glomerulonephritis
Idiopathic membranous 
nephropathy
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Henoch-Schönlein purpura, 
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis 
and other vasculitides
Chronic infections (hepatitis B, 
hepatitis C, malaria, human 
immunodeficiency virus)
Allergic reactions
Diabetes
Amyloidosis
Malignancies
Congestive heart failure, 
constrictive pericarditis
Renal vein thrombosis

--- PAGE 643 ---
621
CHAPTER 162  Nephrotic Syndrome and Proteinuria 
or chemotherapeutic agents. The combination of tubular 
proteinuria with tubular electrolyte wasting and glycosuria is 
termed Fanconi syndrome.
Glomerular proteinuria is characterized by a combination 
of urine large and small molecular weight proteins, variable 
levels of proteinuria, and often other evidence of glomerular 
disease (hematuria, red blood cell casts, HTN, and renal insuf-
ficiency). Causes of glomerular proteinuria include glomerular 
capillary disruption (hemolytic uremic syndrome, crescentic 
glomerulonephritis); glomerular capillary immune complex 
deposition (poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis and lupus 
nephritis); and altered glomerular capillary permeability (MCNS, 
congenital NS).
TREATMENT
Because greater than 80% of children less than 13 years of age 
with primary NS have steroid-responsive forms (chiefly MCNS), 
steroid therapy may be initiated without a renal biopsy if a 
child has typical features of NS. Typical therapy for MCNS is 
prednisone, 2 mg/kg per day (60 mg/m2 per 24 hour, maximum 
60 mg/day), provided once a day or split into multiple doses. 
Over 90% of children who respond to steroids do so within 4 
weeks. Responders should receive steroids for 12 weeks for 
best long-term results. A renal biopsy is indicated for nonre-
sponders because steroid resistance decreases the chance that 
MCNS is the underlying disease. Frequent relapses or steroid 
resistance may necessitate additional immunosuppressive 
therapy.
Treatment responses in FSGS are highly variable. Approxi-
mately 35% respond to steroid therapy; others may respond 
to immunosuppressive therapy. MPGN and membranous 
glomerulonephritis often improve with chronic steroid or 
immunosuppressive therapy but do not reliably remit with 
standard NS steroid therapy. Aggressive medical therapy of 
familial congenital NS, with early nephrectomy, dialysis, and 
transplantation, is the only effective approach to this syndrome.
NS edema is treated by restricting salt intake. Severe edema 
may require use of loop diuretics. When these therapies do not 
alleviate severe edema, cautious parenteral administration of 
25% albumin (0.5-1.0 g/kg intravenously over 1-2 hours) with 
an intravenous loop diuretic usually results in diuresis. The 
administered albumin is excreted rapidly, and thus salt restriction 
and diuretics must be continued. Significant pleural effusions 
may require drainage. Acute HTN is treated with β-blockers 
or calcium channel blockers. Persistent HTN usually responds 
to angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors.
COMPLICATIONS
An increased incidence of serious infections, particularly 
bacteremia and peritonitis (particularly Streptococcus pneu-
moniae, Escherichia coli, or Klebsiella), is due to urinary loss 
of immunoglobulins and complement. Side effects of steroids 
are most common in steroid-dependent and frequently relapsing 
patients. Hypovolemia may result from diarrhea or diuretic 
use. Loss of coagulation factors, antithrombin, and plasminogen 
may lead to a hypercoagulable state with a risk of thrombo-
embolism (TE). Warfarin, Lovenox, low-dose aspirin, or 
dipyridamole may minimize risk of thrombosis in NS patients 
with a history of TE or high risk for TE. Hyperlipidemia 
promotes increased atherosclerotic vascular disease.
infections. Prenatal onset is supported by elevated levels of 
maternal alpha-fetoprotein.
Secondary NS may result from many different causes in 
children and are listed in Table 162.1.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
 Decision-Making Algorithms
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Abdominal Pain
Red Urine and Hematuria
Proteinuria
Edema
The sudden onset of dependent pitting edema or ascites is the 
most common presentation for children with NS. Anorexia, 
malaise, and abdominal pain are often present. Blood pressure 
may be elevated in up to 25% of children on presentation; 
acute tubular necrosis and significant hypotension may occur 
with sudden decline in serum albumin and significant volume 
depletion. Diarrhea (intestinal edema) and respiratory distress 
(pulmonary edema or pleural effusion) may be present. Typical 
MCNS is characterized by absence of gross hematuria, renal 
insufficiency, hypertension (HTN), and hypocomplementemia.
DIAGNOSTIC STUDIES
Proteinuria of 1+ or higher on 2-3 random urine specimens 
suggests persistent proteinuria that should be further quantified. 
A UPr/Cr >0.2 on a first morning specimen excludes orthostatic 
proteinuria. UPr/Cr >2.0 indicates nephrotic range proteinuria.
In addition to a demonstration of proteinuria, hypercho-
lesterolemia, and hypoalbuminemia, routine testing typically 
includes a serum C3 complement. A low serum C3 implies a 
lesion other than MCNS, and a renal biopsy is indicated before 
trial of corticosteroid therapy. Microscopic hematuria may be 
present in up to 25% of cases of MCNS but does not predict 
response to steroids. Additional laboratory tests, including 
electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, total protein, 
and serum albumin level, are performed based on history and 
physical examination features. Renal ultrasound is often useful. 
Biopsy is performed when MCNS is not suspected.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Transient proteinuria can be seen after vigorous exercise, fever, 
dehydration, seizures, and adrenergic agonist therapy. Protein-
uria usually is mild (UPr/Cr <1), glomerular in origin, and always 
resolves within a few days. It does not indicate renal disease.
Postural (orthostatic) proteinuria is a benign condition 
defined by normal protein excretion while recumbent but 
significant proteinuria when upright. It is glomerular in origin, 
more common in adolescents and tall, thin individuals, and not 
associated with progressive renal disease. Many children with 
orthostatic proteinuria continue this process into adulthood.
Tubular proteinuria is characterized by preponderance of 
urine low molecular weight proteins and is seen with acute 
tubular necrosis, pyelonephritis, structural renal disorders, 
polycystic kidney disease, and tubular toxins such as antibiotics 

--- PAGE 644 ---
622
SECTION 22  Nephrology and Urology
Immune-mediated inflammation causes most glomerulo-
nephritis (GN). Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis (PSGN) 
is the most common form of acute GN, and immunoglobulin 
(Ig)A nephropathy is the most common chronic GN, but many 
other types of GN can occur. The most common identifiable 
lower urinary tract causes of hematuria include urinary tract 
infection (UTI), kidney stones, and hypercalciuria.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
PROGNOSIS
Most children with NS eventually go into remission. Nearly 
80% of children with MCNS experience NS relapse, defined as 
heavy proteinuria that persists for 3 or more consecutive days. 
Transient proteinuria (up to 3 days) may occur with intercur-
rent infection in children with MCNS and is not considered 
a relapse. Steroid therapy is typically effective for true relapse. 
Steroid-responsive patients have little risk of chronic renal 
failure. Patients with FSGS may initially respond to steroids 
but later develop resistance. Many children with FSGS pro-
gress to end-stage kidney failure (see Chapter 165). Recur-
rence of FSGS occurs in ~30% of children who undergo renal 
transplantation.
CHAPTER 163 
Glomerulonephritis  
and Hematuria
ETIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
A child with gross hematuria may have a serious disease and 
requires prompt evaluation. Microscopic hematuria, defined 
as >3-5 red blood cells (RBCs) per high-power field on freshly 
voided and centrifuged urine, can be benign. Isolated asymp-
tomatic microscopic hematuria is found in up to 4% of healthy 
children. In most cases this is a transient finding. Hematuria 
may originate from glomerular, tubulointerstitial, or lower 
urinary tract disorders (Table 163.1).
TABLE 163.1  Differential Diagnosis of Red Urine/
Hematuria
FACTITIOUS HEMATURIA
Nonpathological (urate crystals in infants, ingested foods, 
medications, dyes)
Pathological (hemoglobinuria from hemolytic anemia, 
myoglobinuria from rhabdomyolysis)
GLOMERULAR
Immunological injury (GN—e.g., PSGN, IgA nephropathy, MPGN, 
systemic diseases)
Structural disorder (Alport syndrome, thin basement membrane 
disease)
Toxin-mediated injury (HUS)
TUBULOINTERSTITIAL/PARENCHYMAL
Inflammation (interstitial nephritis, pyelonephritis)
Vascular (sickle cell trait/disease, Nutcracker syndrome)
Structural (cyst rupture, Wilms tumor, urinary tract obstruction, 
renal trauma)
LOWER URINARY TRACT
Inflammation (cystitis, hemorrhagic cystitis, urethritis)
Injury (trauma, kidney stone)
Hypercalciuria
GN, Glomerulonephritis; HUS, hemolytic uremic syndrome; Ig, immunoglobulin; 
MPGN, membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis; PSGN, poststreptococcal 
glomerulonephritis.
 Decision-Making Algorithms
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Red Urine and Hematuria
Proteinuria
Edema
Hypertension
Children with acute GN commonly present with hematuria 
(gross or microscopic) and other cardinal features of glomerular 
injury (proteinuria, hypertension, edema, oliguria, renal insuf-
ficiency). PSGN occurs most frequently in children 2-12 years 
of age and is more common in boys. Manifestations of PSGN 
are typical of acute GN and develop 5-21 days (average 10 
days) after streptococcal pharyngitis infections and 4-6 weeks 
after impetigo. Acute postinfectious GN presents similar to 
PSGN following infections with other bacterial and viral 
pathogens. PSGN can develop even in the child treated with 
antibiotics for the infection. Special attention must be paid to 
the blood pressure as hypertension may be severe enough to 
cause heart failure, seizures, and/or encephalopathy.
The presentation of IgA nephropathy is more variable and 
may take the form of acute GN, asymptomatic microscopic 
hematuria, or recurrent gross hematuria concurrent with an 
upper respiratory infection (rather than several days later, as 
with PSGN). Children with hematuria secondary to systemic 
disorders such as Henoch-Schönlein purpura nephritis, lupus 
nephritis, and vasculitis-associated GN typically present with 
other systemic features of the respective disease.
A special form of GN is rapidly progressive glomerulone-
phritis (RPGN) that presents with typical features of acute GN 
where renal insufficiency progresses more quickly and severely. 
Renal biopsy shows glomerular epithelial cell proliferation with 
crescents. RPGN may be idiopathic or secondary to any type of 
GN. Early recognition of RPGN is crucial to prevent progression 
to end-stage renal disease (ESRD) that occurs without prompt 
treatment.
Alport syndrome is typically caused by X-linked chromo-
some mutations, but has also been associated with mutations of 
genes for type IV collagen, both leading to abnormal glomerular 
basement membrane (GBM). The disease may present with 
either asymptomatic microscopic or gross hematuria. Males 
typically develop progressive renal failure and sensorineural 
hearing loss during adolescence and young adulthood. Females 
typically have a more benign course but usually have at least 
microscopic hematuria. Thin basement membrane disease 
(benign familial hematuria) is caused by mutations leading to 
isolated GBM thinning; these mutations are often autosomal 
dominant with hematuria frequently noted in first-degree 
relatives. As opposed to Alport syndrome, thin basement 

--- PAGE 645 ---
623
CHAPTER 163  Glomerulonephritis and Hematuria 
A suggested algorithm for the evaluation of hematuria is 
given in Fig. 163.1. Gross hematuria and microscopic hematuria 
with associated concerning findings should have additional 
laboratory evaluation. Presence of low C3 complement narrows 
the differential diagnosis to PSGN, membranoproliferative GN, 
and lupus nephritis. Children with isolated, asymptomatic 
microscopic hematuria may be observed with repeat urinalyses. 
If hematuria is persistent, additional evaluation may then be 
appropriate.
THERAPY
Therapy for PSGN is supportive and involves dietary sodium 
restriction, diuretics, and antihypertensive agents as needed. 
Although treating the streptococcal infection does not prevent 
PSGN, antibiotic treatment is still warranted with active 
streptococcal infection. Therapies for children with other 
forms of GN depend on underlying cause and severity. In 
some cases, antiinflammatory therapy involving corticosteroids 
and/or other immunosuppressive agents may be warranted. 
Treatment with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors 
may reduce proteinuria and glomerular hyperperfusion, but 
should be used with caution in the setting of acute kidney 
injury.
PROGNOSIS AND PREVENTION
PSGN usually has a benign outcome. In typical cases, the gross 
hematuria, proteinuria, and edema decline quickly (5-10 days). 
Microscopic hematuria may persist for months or even years; 
membrane disease is typically not progressive and usually has 
an excellent prognosis.
The presentation of nonglomerular causes of hematuria is 
more variable and related to the underlying etiology. Hematuria 
due to tubular disorders is usually microscopic and may be 
associated with proteinuria, glycosuria, and polyuria. These 
children typically do not have hypertension and develop renal 
insufficiency only with more severe disease. Painless gross 
hematuria may be seen with strenuous exercise, sickle cell 
trait/disease, or Wilms tumor. Hematuria may be associated 
with pain when due to bleeding from renal cysts or Nutcracker 
syndrome (renal vein compression). Gross hematuria following 
trauma may signify more severe renal or lower urinary tract 
injury. UTI is typically associated with dysuria and urinary 
frequency. Urolithiasis may be associated with asymptomatic 
hematuria or with flank or abdominal pain. Hypercalciuria 
can cause both gross and microscopic hematuria and may be 
associated with urinary tract symptoms such as dysuria and 
urinary frequency or may be asymptomatic.
DIAGNOSTIC STUDIES
All patients with hematuria should have a careful history and 
physical (including blood pressure) along with urinalysis includ-
ing microscopic examination to identify RBCs. Glomerular 
hematuria is suggested by brownish (tea- or cola-colored) urine 
and presence of RBC casts and/or dysmorphic RBCs on urine 
microscopy. A urine color that is more bright red without RBC 
casts or dysmorphic RBCs is more suggestive of lower urinary 
tract source. However, there may be overlap of these findings.
History and physical
Urinalysis to confirm RBCs
Directed evaluation studies
based on suspected cause
Cause apparent on H&P
e.g., UTI, trauma,
kidney stone, GN
Urinalysis
Cause not apparent
on H&P
Urate crystals in infants
Medications, foods, dyes
Urine microscopy
Negative for blood
Positive for blood
Hemolytic anemia
Rhabdomyolysis
Minimal RBCs
Repeat urinalysis x2 at least one week apart
Tests to consider if hematuria persistent:
Urine calcium to creatinine ratio
Test first degree relatives for hematuria
Hgb electrophoresis to rule out sickle cell
Serum chemistries
Renal ultrasound
RBCs confirmed
Isolated microscopic
hematuria
Urine culture
Urine calcium to creatinine ratio
Urine protein to creatinine ratio
Serum chemistries
Serum albumin
C3 and C4 complement
Complete blood count
Renal ultrasound
Renal biopsy in selected cases
RBCs confirmed
Symptomatic microscopic hematuria
or gross hematuria
FIGURE 163.1  Suggested algorithm for evaluation of red urine/hematuria. GN, Glomerulonephritis; 
Hgb, hemoglobin; H&P, history and physical; RBCs, red blood cells; UTI, urinary tract infection. 

--- PAGE 646 ---
624
SECTION 22  Nephrology and Urology
involvement, including seizures, occurs in up to 25% of cases. 
Other potential organ involvement includes pancreatitis, cardiac 
dysfunction, and colonic perforation.
Children without evidence of diarrheal prodrome may have 
a similar microangiopathic syndrome, identified as thrombotic 
thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP). Children with TTP typically 
have predominant CNS symptoms but may also have significant 
renal disease. Recurrent episodes are common. Because CNS 
involvement is also seen in HUS, TTP can be difficult to dis-
tinguish from HUS in some cases. Deficiencies of ADAMTS13, 
a von Willebrand factor-cleaving protease, have been identified 
in children affected with TTP.
DIAGNOSTIC STUDIES
Common laboratory findings in HUS are listed in Table 164.1. 
Peripheral blood smear reveals evidence of microangiopathic 
hemolysis. Coombs test is negative. Diarrhea and presence of 
toxin-producing E. coli may have resolved by the time HUS is 
diagnosed.
TREATMENT AND PROGNOSIS
Therapy for HUS is supportive and includes volume repletion, 
hypertension control, and managing complications of renal 
insufficiency, including dialysis when indicated. Red blood cell 
transfusions are provided as needed. Platelet transfusions should 
be avoided because they may add to the thrombotic microan-
giopathy and are indicated only by active hemorrhage or prior 
to a procedure. Antibiotics and antidiarrheal agents may increase 
risk of developing HUS. Early hydration during the diarrheal 
phase may lessen the severity of renal insufficiency. Most 
children (>95%) with D + HUS survive the acute phase and 
recover normal renal function, although some may have evidence 
of long-term renal and other morbidity.
greater than 95% of children recover completely with no long-
term sequelae.
Children with IgA nephropathy and other forms of chronic 
GN have greater risk of progression to ESRD. The prognosis 
for renal recovery in chronic GN and in RPGN is variable 
and related to the underlying disorder and disease severity. 
The presence of persistent, heavy proteinuria, hypertension, 
decreased kidney function, and severe glomerular lesions on 
biopsy is associated with poor outcomes.
Children with idiopathic isolated, asymptomatic microscopic 
hematuria or suspected thin basement membrane disease typi-
cally have an excellent renal prognosis. Long-term follow-up, 
including yearly urinalysis (to rule out proteinuria) and blood 
pressure measurement, is required to exclude progressive forms 
of renal disease.
CHAPTER 164 
Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome
ETIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) is characterized by the 
triad of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, thrombocyto-
penia, and renal injury and is an important cause of acute 
kidney injury in children. HUS typically occurs in children 
less than 5 years of age, but can occur in older children. The 
most common type of HUS is associated with a prodromal 
diarrheal illness (D + HUS). Contamination of meat, fruit, 
vegetables, or water with verotoxin (VT)-producing Escherichia 
coli (most commonly E. coli O157:H7) is responsible for many 
outbreaks. VT may be produced by other E. coli strains as well 
as other bacteria such as Shigella. VT causes hemorrhagic 
enterocolitis of variable severity and results in HUS in ~5-15% 
of affected children.
HUS presenting without a prodrome of diarrhea (atypical 
HUS) may occur at any age. The clinical course is usually 
more severe than D + HUS. Atypical HUS can be secondary 
to infection (Streptococcus pneumonia, human immunodeficiency 
virus), genetic and acquired defects in complement regulation, 
medications, malignancy, systemic lupus erythematosus, and 
pregnancy.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
 Decision-Making Algorithms
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Diarrhea
Petechiae/Purpura
TABLE 164.1  Common Laboratory Findings With 
Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome
EVIDENCE OF MICROANGIOPATHIC HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA
Anemia
Thrombocytopenia
Presence of schistocytes, helmet cells, and burr cells on peripheral 
blood smear
Increased LDH
Decreased haptoglobin
Increased indirect bilirubin
Increased AST
Elevated reticulocyte count
EVIDENCE OF RENAL INJURY
Elevated creatinine
Presence of hematuria, proteinuria, pyuria, casts on urinalysis
OTHER POTENTIAL FINDINGS
Leukocytosis
Positive stool culture for E. coli O157:H7
Positive stool test for shiga-toxin
Elevated amylase/lipase
AST, Aspartate aminotransferase; E. coli, Escherichia coli; LDH, lactate 
dehydrogenase.
Classic D + HUS begins with enterocolitis, often with bloody 
stools, followed in 7-10 days by weakness, lethargy, and oliguria/
anuria. Physical examination reveals irritability, pallor, and 
petechiae. Dehydration is frequent; however, some children 
have volume overload. Hypertension may be due to volume 
overload and/or renal injury. Central nervous system (CNS) 

--- PAGE 647 ---
625
CHAPTER 165  Acute and Chronic Renal Failure
depending on the severity of the injury. Glomerular and vascular 
disorders may present with hematuria, edema, hypertension, 
and oliguria. The urine output with postrenal AKI may be low 
or normal and may be associated with flank masses or a dis-
tended bladder on examination. Depending on the underlying 
cause and severity of illness, AKI can be associated with signs 
of dehydration or volume overload.
Diagnostic Studies
A urinalysis (UA) should be obtained in all children with AKI. 
In prerenal azotemia, UA is unremarkable with high specific 
gravity reflecting appropriate renal retention of water associated 
with renal hypoperfusion. However, neonates are not able to 
CHAPTER 165 
Acute and Chronic Renal Failure
ACUTE KIDNEY INJURY
Etiology
Acute kidney injury (AKI), formerly termed acute renal failure, 
refers to an abrupt decrease in glomerular filtration rate (GFR) 
and tubular function. This may lead to decreased excretion of 
waste products (e.g., urea) and disturbance in fluid and elec-
trolyte homeostasis. Early recognition and management of AKI 
are crucial.
AKI may be oliguric (<1 mL/kg/hr in neonates and infants, 
<0.5 mL/kg/hr in children) or nonoliguric, which is more 
difficult to recognize. Although urine output in nonoliguric 
AKI is normal or polyuric, electrolyte disturbances and uremia 
may become significant. Major causes of AKI may be divided 
into prerenal (renal hypoperfusion), intrinsic renal (tubular, 
glomerular, or vascular injury), and postrenal (urinary tract 
obstruction) categories (Table 165.1). In many cases, the cause 
of AKI is multifactorial.
Prerenal azotemia is most commonly due to dehydration, 
but may be secondary to other mechanisms of glomerular 
hypoperfusion. Tubular injury encompasses the most common 
causes of intrinsic AKI in children. Tubular injury may occur 
from hypoxia-ischemia (acute tubular necrosis), infection 
(sepsis), nephrotoxic agents (medications, contrast, myoglobin), 
and inflammation (interstitial nephritis). Postrenal AKI may be 
due to either structural or functional urinary tract obstruction.
Clinical Manifestations
TABLE 165.1  Causes of Acute Kidney Injury
PRERENAL
Dehydration
Hemorrhage
Septic shock
Burns
Heart failure
Cirrhosis
POSTRENAL (OBSTRUCTION)
Urethral obstruction (stricture, posterior urethral valves)
Ureteral obstruction
Ureterocele
Extrinsic tumor compressing bladder outlet
Neurogenic bladder (myelomeningocele, spinal cord injury)
INTRINSIC
Acute tubular necrosis
Nephrotoxins (medications, contrast, myoglobin)
Infection (sepsis)
Interstitial nephritis
Glomerular injury (primary glomerulonephritis, vasculitis, hemolytic 
uremic syndrome)
Vascular (renal vein thrombosis, arterial emboli, malignant 
hypertension)
 Decision-Making Algorithm
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Hypertension
TABLE 165.2  Laboratory and Clinical Evaluation of Acute Kidney Injury
LABORATORY/CLINICAL 
FEATURE
PRERENAL
RENAL
POSTRENAL
CHILD
NEONATE
CHILD
NEONATE
Urine output
Low
Low, normal, or high
Low or normal
Urinalysis
Normal
RBCs, WBCs, protein, casts
Variable
Urine Na+ (mEq/L)
<15
<20-30
>40
>50
Variable, may be >40
FENa* (%)
<1
<2.5
>2
>2.5
Variable, may be >2
Urine osmolality (mOsm/L)
>500
>350
~300
~300
Variable, may be <300
Renal ultrasound
Normal
Increased echogenicity, decreased 
corticomedullary differentiation
Hydronephrosis
*FENa (%) = [(urine sodium/plasma sodium) ÷ (urine creatinine/plasma creatinine)] × 100.
FENa, Fractional excretion of sodium; RBCs, red blood cells; WBCs, white blood cells.
History, physical examination, and basic studies usually allow 
proper classification of the child with AKI (Table 165.2). Prerenal 
azotemia is characterized by history of precipitating factors 
and oliguria. Intrinsic tubular injury is associated with precipitat-
ing factors, but urine output may be low, normal, or high, 

--- PAGE 648 ---
626
SECTION 22  Nephrology and Urology
CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE
Etiology and Epidemiology
Congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT) 
are the most common causes of CKD that present between birth 
and 10 years of age. After age 10, acquired renal diseases, such 
as focal segmental glomerulosclerosis and glomerulonephritis 
(GN), are more common causes of CKD. Risk of progression 
to end-stage renal disease (ESRD) is related to the underlying 
cause and severity of CKD. During puberty, renal function 
may deteriorate if the damaged kidneys are not able to grow 
and adapt to increased demands. CKD is staged to facilitate 
appropriate evaluation and monitoring (Table 165.4). GFR can be 
estimated in children using the Schwartz formula (see Chapter 
161). Most complications of CKD do not manifest until at least 
stage 3 CKD. In stage 4 CKD, complications become more 
numerous and severe. Children with stage 5 CKD (ESRD) are 
typically treated with either dialysis or renal transplantation.
Clinical Manifestations
The clinical presentation of a child with CKD is related to both 
underlying cause and complications of CKD. A child with 
CAKUT may have polyuria, polydipsia, and recurrent urinary 
tract infections. A child with glomerular disease may have 
hematuria, proteinuria, edema, and hypertension. Common 
complications of CKD in children are listed in Table 165.5. 
concentrate urine as well. With intrinsic tubular injury and 
postrenal AKI, UA may show mild hematuria and/or proteinuria 
with specific gravity 1.015 or less. With glomerular and vascular 
injury, hematuria and proteinuria are usually moderate to severe. 
In oliguric states, differentiation between prerenal azotemia 
and acute tubular necrosis may be aided by determining urine 
osmolality and fractional excretion of sodium (see Table 165.2). 
Renal ultrasound is often helpful in defining AKI category 
(see Table 165.2). Renal biopsy is indicated only in select cases.
Common electrolyte abnormalities seen with AKI include 
hyperkalemia, metabolic acidosis, hypocalcemia, and hyper-
phosphatemia. These labs may need to be monitored frequently, 
depending on initial results and clinical course. A complete blood 
count should be obtained as anemia is frequently observed. 
Other studies may be obtained as clinically indicated.
Treatment
In some cases the underlying disorder can be treated. Examples 
include volume repletion in dehydration, stopping an offending 
nephrotoxic medication, and relieving urinary tract obstruction. 
In all cases efforts should be made to limit additional renal 
injury (e.g., ensuring adequate renal perfusion and avoiding 
nephrotoxic medications). Medication dosages should be 
adjusted for decreased renal function as appropriate.
Fluid therapy depends on volume status and urine output. 
If hypovolemia is present, intravascular volume should be 
expanded by intravenous saline administration. If hypervolemia 
is present, 1-2 mg/kg of furosemide and fluid restriction may 
be attempted. If euvolemia is present, total fluid input should 
be adjusted to meet the urine output, which may be higher or 
lower than normal. Assessment of intake and output should be 
augmented with serial body weight measurements.
AKI treatment particularly involves management of potential 
complications. Electrolyte disorders are treated as appropriate. 
Potassium intake and medications that increase potassium should 
be restricted. If hyperkalemia is present, intravenous calcium 
will lower the risk of arrhythmia while measures are initiated 
to shift potassium into cells (bicarbonate, β-agonists, insulin/
dextrose) and hasten removal (diuretics, sodium-potassium 
exchange resins, dialysis). Preferred treatment of hypocalcemia 
involves oral calcium supplementation and calcitriol; intrave-
nous (IV) calcium is reserved for severe cases. Hypertension 
may be treated with diuretics, calcium channel blockers, and 
vasodilators. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors 
are usually avoided in the setting of AKI.
Major indications for acute dialysis are listed in Table 
165.3. Medical therapy may be attempted before initiating 
renal replacement therapy. There is no set blood urea nitrogen 
or creatinine level at which dialysis is started in AKI. Renal 
replacement options in children include peritoneal dialysis, 
hemodialysis, and continuous renal replacement therapy. The 
mode is selected based on individual factors.
Prognosis
Recovery from AKI depends on etiology, severity, availability 
of specific treatments, and other patient aspects. Nonoliguric 
AKI usually recovers well, whereas outcomes with oliguric AKI 
are more variable. Even with seemingly good recovery, a history 
of AKI places the child at increased risk for future renal 
complications, including chronic kidney disease (CKD).
TABLE 165.3  Indications for Renal Replacement Therapy
ACUTE AND/OR CHRONIC DIALYSIS
Volume overload
Metabolic acidosis
Electrolyte abnormalities
Uremia
ACUTE DIALYSIS
Certain ingestions
Hyperammonemia
CHRONIC DIALYSIS
Poor growth
Stage 5 chronic kidney disease (end-stage renal disease)
TABLE 165.4  Classification of the Stages of Chronic 
Kidney Disease
STAGE
GFR (mL/min/ 
1.73 m2)*
DESCRIPTION
1
>90
Minimal kidney damage
2
60-89
Kidney damage with mild 
reduction of GFR
3
30-59
Moderate reduction of GFR
4
15-29
Severe reduction of GFR
5
<15 (or dialysis)
End-stage renal disease
*GFR ranges apply for children 2 years of age and older.
GFR, Glomerular filtration rate.
From National Kidney Foundation Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative.

--- PAGE 649 ---
627
CHAPTER 166  Hypertension
The optimal treatment of ESRD is renal transplantation. 
Both deceased and living donors can be used for renal transplan-
tation. Living donors are preferred when available. Maintenance 
dialysis is effective for a child awaiting renal transplantation 
or when renal transplantation is not possible. Indications for 
chronic dialysis are given in Table 165.3. Peritoneal dialysis 
is done at home by the family. Hemodialysis is typically done 
three times a week at a dialysis facility.
Prognosis
Children with mild CKD (stages 1 and 2) may do well but need 
to be monitored for progressive loss of kidney function. Children 
with stages 3 and 4 CKD have a high likelihood of progressing 
to ESRD at some point, although the timing can vary. Children 
with kidney transplants generally do well, but have to take 
immunosuppressive medications associated with a variety of 
side effects, including infections, nephrotoxicity, cardiovascular 
complications, and increased risk for certain malignancies. 
Unfortunately, most transplanted kidneys fail over time but 
can last for >10-20 years. Children on maintenance dialysis 
have the highest morbidity and mortality, especially with longer 
time spent on dialysis. Thus the primary goal is to provide a 
kidney transplant for children with ESRD.
CHAPTER 166 
Hypertension
DEFINITION
In children, hypertension (HTN) is defined as blood pressure 
(BP) greater than 95th percentile for age, gender, and height 
measured on at least three different occasions. The context of 
BP measurement (e.g., cuff size, pain, anxiety) is important. 
Staging of HTN is listed in Table 166.1. Hypertensive emergency 
is defined as severe BP elevation associated with target organ 
damage (encephalopathy, heart failure).
ETIOLOGY
Pediatric HTN has many causes (Table 166.2) that are either 
primary (essential) or secondary. Essential HTN is the most 
common cause of HTN in younger children and adolescents. 
Obese children are more likely to develop essential HTN. 
Secondary HTN should be suspected with younger age and 
more severely elevated BP. Renal disease is the most common 
cause of secondary HTN in children.
Most of these complications are multifactorial in etiology. For 
example, factors associated with growth failure include poor 
nutrition, CKD-mineral bone disorder (CKD-MBD), metabolic 
acidosis, hormonal abnormalities, and resistance to growth 
hormone. Anemia results primarily from a failure to produce 
adequate erythropoietin and iron deficiency. CKD-MBD is 
usually due to secondary hyperparathyroidism as a result of 
diminished renal 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D production, hypo-
calcemia, and hyperphosphatemia (from decreased renal 
excretion). If prolonged and/or severe, CKD-MBD may lead 
to rickets and bone deformities. Hypertension and left ven-
tricular hypertrophy are common cardiovascular complications. 
Delayed puberty results from altered gonadotropin secretion 
and regulation. Learning and school performance may also be 
impaired in CKD.
Treatment
The management of children with advanced CKD requires a 
multidisciplinary team of pediatric practitioners. Adequate 
nutrition should be provided even if this requires dietary 
supplements and tube feedings. In infants, a low-solute formula 
may be indicated. Unless a child is oliguric, fluid restriction is 
not necessary. Many children with CAKUT require supplemental 
salt due to urine sodium wasting. Conversely, children with 
GN tend to retain sodium and may become hypertensive or 
edematous if given excess salt. Common treatment consider-
ations for other CKD complications are given in Table 165.5.
Measures can be taken to preserve kidney function or slow 
progression of CKD. Hypertension and proteinuria can be 
treated with ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers. 
Potentially nephrotoxic medications should be avoided when 
feasible. Medication adjustment for reduced kidney function is 
important. Protein intake is typically not restricted in pediatric 
CKD.
TABLE 165.5  Common Complications and Treatments of 
Chronic Kidney Disease
COMPLICATION
TREATMENT
1.	 Poor growth
Increased caloric intake, treat acidosis, 
treat CKD-MBD, recombinant GH
2.	 Anemia
Erythropoietin, iron supplementation
3.	 CKD-Mineral Bone 
Disorder/secondary 
hyperparathyroidism
1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D 
supplementation, calcium 
supplementation, dietary phosphorous 
restriction, phosphate binders
4.	 Cardiovascular
4a.	 Hypertension
Antihypertensive medications
4b.	 Left ventricular 
hypertrophy
Volume control
5.	 Electrolyte 
abnormalities
5a.	 Hyperkalemia
Low K diet, furosemide, sodium 
polystyrene sulfonate
5b.	 Hyponatremia
Sodium supplementation
5c.	 Metabolic 
acidosis
Alkali replacement
CKD, Chronic kidney disease; CKD-MBD, chronic kidney disease—mineral bone 
disorder; GH, growth hormone; K, potassium.
TABLE 166.1  Classification of Blood Pressure
BLOOD PRESSURE 
CATEGORY
BLOOD PRESSURE 
PERCENTILE (%)
Normal
<90th
Prehypertension
90th-95th*
Stage 1 hypertension
95th to (99th + 5 mm Hg)
Stage 2 hypertension
>99th + 5 mm Hg
*If 90th % is greater than 120/80, use 120/80 as the lower limit.

--- PAGE 650 ---
628
SECTION 22  Nephrology and Urology
tachycardia with flushing and diaphoresis (pheochromocytoma); 
and truncal obesity, acne, striae, and buffalo hump (Cushing 
syndrome). Signs of underlying kidney disease may be present.
DIAGNOSTIC STUDIES
In addition to history and physical examination, evaluation of 
children with confirmed HTN includes:
1.	 Baseline etiological assessment (urinalysis, electrolytes, blood 
urea nitrogen, creatinine, and renal ultrasound)
2.	 Focused studies based on clinical suspicion (e.g., plasma 
metanephrines, thyroid studies, vascular imaging)
3.	 Assessment for target organ damage (echocardiogram for 
left ventricular hypertrophy)
4.	 Assessment of other cardiovascular risk factors (lipids, fasting 
glucose, uric acid)
TREATMENT
Therapeutic lifestyle changes (diet, exercise) should be initiated 
for asymptomatic stage 1 HTN without target organ damage 
or systemic disease. Medication should be started for stage 2 
or symptomatic HTN and stage 1 HTN that fails to respond 
to lifestyle changes over 6-12 months. Calcium channel blockers 
or angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors are the most 
frequently chosen first-line options in children. Angiotensin 
receptor blockers, β-blockers, or diuretics are also effective 
first-line antihypertensive agents. More than one agent may be 
needed. Hypertensive emergency requires prompt hospitalization 
and may require parenteral antihypertensive treatment with 
nicardipine, labetalol, esmolol, or sodium nitroprusside.
PROGNOSIS
Prognosis depends on underlying etiology and BP control. 
Essential HTN is usually not associated with morbidity at 
presentation. Left untreated, however, even asymptomatic stage 
1 HTN may increase risk for cardiovascular, central nervous 
system, and renal morbidity in adults.
CHAPTER 167 
Vesicoureteral Reflux
ETIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Vesicoureteral reflux (VUR) is retrograde flow of urine from 
the bladder up the ureter or even into the kidney. Most VUR 
results from congenital incompetence of the ureterovesical (UV) 
junction, a structure that matures through early childhood. In 
a significant minority of children, structural UV abnormalities 
exist that never resolve. VUR may be familial; 30-40% of siblings 
of a child with VUR also have VUR. VUR may also be secondary 
to distal bladder obstruction or other urinary tract anomalies.
VUR exposes the kidney to increased hydrodynamic pressure 
during voiding and increases likelihood of renal infection due 
to incomplete emptying of the ureter and bladder (see Chapter 
114). Reflux nephropathy refers to development and progression 
of renal scarring. This is a particular risk if VUR is associated 
with urinary tract infection (UTI) or obstruction. Although a 
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
TABLE 166.2  Causes of Hypertension
PRIMARY HYPERTENSION
Essential hypertension
Metabolic syndrome
RENAL CAUSES
Congenital anomalies (renal dysplasia, obstructive uropathy)
Structural disorders (Wilms tumor, polycystic kidney disease)
Glomerulonephritis
Acquired injury (renal scarring, acute tubular necrosis)
ENDOCRINE CAUSES
Catecholamine-secreting tumors (pheochromocytoma, 
neuroblastoma)
Hypercortisolism (Cushing syndrome)
Hyperaldosteronism
Hyperthyroidism
NEUROLOGICAL CAUSES
Increased sympathetic activity (stress, anxiety, pain)
Dysautonomia
Increased intracranial pressure
VASCULAR CAUSES
Coarctation of the aorta
Renal artery embolism (from umbilical artery catheter)
Renal vein thrombosis
Renal artery stenosis
Vasculitis
OTHER CAUSES
Obstructive sleep apnea
Medications, illicit drugs
 Decision-Making Algorithms
Available @ StudentConsult.com
Red Urine and Hematuria
Hypertension
Headaches
Obesity
Alkalemia
Most children with HTN have no symptoms. Signs and symp-
toms associated with severe HTN include encephalopathy 
(headache, vomiting, seizures), heart failure, stroke, and 
retinopathy (blurred vision, flame hemorrhage, and cotton wool 
spots on retinal exam). Neonatal history (low birth weight or 
use of umbilical artery catheter); family history of HTN, stroke, 
or heart disease; and dietary history (excessive salt or caffeine, 
drugs) are important. Additional findings that may suggest 
specific causes include abdominal bruit (renal artery stenosis); 
diminished leg pressure and weak femoral pulse (coarctation 
of aorta); café-au-lait spots (neurofibromatosis-associated renal 
artery stenosis); flank mass (hydronephrosis, Wilms tumor); 
